Abstract
Certainfoods and nutrients help brain to make chemicals that can impact mood, attention and focus, while other foods can zap our energy. The best meal to enhance our mood is one that combines complex carbohydrates with lean proteins. For example, complex carbohydrates from whole foods (like sweet potatoes, rolled oats, beans and quinoa) can increase availability of the feel-good chemical serotonin in our brain. Protein consumption (from foods like fish, beef, chicken, turkey, tofu, beans, eggs and unsweetened yogurt) which has been linked to higher levels of dopamine and norepinephrine, which are brain chemicals that play a role in ourmood, motivation and concentration. Fruits and vegetables are high in vitamins, minerals and antioxidants that nourish your body and have also been shown to boost happiness. The focus of nutrition research is shifting away from nutrients in isolation and toward the unique interactions that occur between nutrients in food. Eating moderate portions of a wide variety of whole, minimally processed foods will provide optimal nutrition and contribute to overall diet satisfaction. A healthy eating pattern should include foods from every food group: dairy, vegetables, fruits, whole grains and protein. Eating healthfully under this broad definition can look different depending on factors such as age, physical activity, health condition, taste preference and cultural variation.
This article explores how food affects our mental health, helps in using food to improve our overall mental and physical wellbeing.More research is needed on the impact of individual nutrients on mental health disorders, yet it is clear there is a link between low-nutrient, highly processed diets and mental health issues. Early intervention for mental disorders is key, so ensuring children receive nourishing food and are educated about nutrition is more important than ever. Physical and mental states are closely intertwined, and nutrition plays an important role in maintaining a state of health and wellness. A nourished body and mind will be better equipped to handle life’s challenges.
Keywords: Behaviour, food, nutrition, mood.
 








1.	Food and Mental Health
What we eat and drink affects how we feel, think and behave. There is research to suggest that what we eat may affect not just our physical health, but also our mental health and wellbeing. Eating well (i.e., a well-balanced diet rich in vegetables and nutrients) may be associated with feelings of wellbeing.We all know eating “healthy” food is good for our physical health and can decrease our risk of developing diabetes, cancer, obesity and heart disease. What is not as well known is that eating healthy food is also good for our mental health and can decrease our risk of depression and anxiety. One of the most obvious yet under recognized factors in the development of mental health is “NUTRITION”. Just like the heart, stomach and liver, the brain is an organ that requires different amounts of complexcarbohydrates, essential fatty acids, amino acids, vitamins, minerals and water to remain healthy.
From a young age, we’re taught that eating well helps us look and feel our physical best. What we’re not always told is that good nutrition significantly affects our mental health, too. A healthy, well-balanced diet can help us think clearly and feel more alert. It can also improve concentration and attention span. Conversely, an inadequate diet can lead to fatigue, impaired decision-making, and can slow down reaction time. In fact, a poor diet can actually aggravate, and may even lead to, stress and depression.
▶ Diet: Usually refers to the kinds of food that a person habitually eats. InWestern culture ‘diet’ is also often applied to the lifestyle changes used to lose weight. Although applied to the changes most often used to resolve a problem associated with being overweight or health issues, this may be more in line with the Latin origins of the word taken from the Greek ‘diaita’, meaning a ‘way of life’.
▶ Balanced diet: Refers to eating a wide variety of foods in the right proportions and consuming the right amount of food and drink to achieve and maintain a healthy body weight.
▶ Nutrition: Refers to the quality of the food we eat (for example, whether food is processed or fresh), the kind of food we eat (for example, whether foods are vitamin and mineral rich; or how many calories they contain), how we chose to eat (quantity, timing, motivation for eating different types of food) and how the food has been produced (for example, has it been treated with pesticides?).


2.	Nutrient Depletion Can Imitate Mental Health Disorders
 
Symptoms in mental Health Disorders such as Fatigue,Anxiety, Depression, Irritability, Poor mood, Stress Intolerance, Overeating, cravings, Inability to sleepand Neurotransmitter Depletion are also present in nutritional depletion as well.Healthy eating contributes to a healthy mind, body and spirit and not just physical health.Unfortunately, many of the foods we eat today are over-processed, contain chemicals and preservatives, and lack nutrients.Among other benefits, good food can, boost our energy, lower the risk of developing certain diseases, provide fuel to brain, counteract the impact of stress on body and affect mood-related body chemicals
3.	Essential Nutrients
Macronutrients includes Carbohydrates such as sugars, starches and fiber, proteins from animal and plant sources, fats from animal and vegetable fats,and fish oils.Micronutrientsare Vitamins – A, B complex, C, D, E, K, Mineralslike calcium, iron, sodium, magnesium, Zinc and water
4.	Nutrition and the Brain

Food intake affects a person’s mood, behavior, and brain function. The brain is an organ with very high metabolic and nutrient demands. On average, the brain consumes 20% of a person’s daily caloric intake, approximately 400 calories per day. It is composed of 60% fat, and contains high concentrations of cholesterol and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) such as Omega-3s.Poor mood or behavior may be the first signs of a nutritional deficiency

Production of monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, important in the pathophysiology of mental illness, depends on adequate building blocks of amino acids, and mineral dependent co-factors. Folate and other B vitamins are essential for the methylation cycle, which produces a co-factor crucial for monoamine neurotransmitter synthesis, BH-4. Proper function of the methylation cycle also reduces homocysteine elevated levels of which are linked to cardiovascular disease and depression. Inflammation may play an important role in mediating the link between diet and mental health. Multiple lines of research support the pathogenic role of neuroinflammation in mental illness. Lucas et al. (2014) used several inflammatory biomarkers including CRP, TNF alpha receptor 2, and IL-6 and data from food frequency questionnaires to derive an inflammatory dietary pattern from a sample of over 12,000 participants from the Nurses’ Health Study. Participants who consumed a diet consistent with the inflammatory dietary pattern had a statistically significant increased risk of developing depression over time after adjusting for multiple confounders. Specifically, over twelve years of follow up, participants with the highest adherence to the inflammatory dietary pattern had a relative risk of 1.41 (1.22–1.63) of developing depression according to the strict definition (physician diagnosis and anti-depressant use). The inflammatory dietary pattern was high in in sugar-sweetened soft drinks, refined grains, red meat, diet soft drinks, and margarine and low in wine, coffee, olive oil, green leafy, and yellow vegetables.

5.	Nutrition and Mental Disorders
 
Increased prevalence of mental health disorders linked to poor quality diet. Common nutritional deficiencies seen in patients with mental health disorders are Omega 3 fatty acids, B vitamins and some minerals and amino acids.The foods you eat can affect the chemical composition of your brain because the nutrients in foods are precursors to neurotransmitters.
Neurotransmitters are chemical messengers that tell our body what to do and how to feel. The most important neuro transmitters are Serotonin,Dopamine,Endorphins and Choline (precursor to acetylcholine).
Omega-3 fatty acids form an integral part of neuronal cell membranes and influence a number of essential processes in the central nervous system. More specifically, they regulate neurotransmission, influence gene expression, and directly affect neurogenesis and neuronal survival. They also act as anti-oxidants and have anti-inflammatory properties. Along with omega-3 intake, the balance of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids also appears to be relevant. Western diets tend to be abundant in omega-6 fatty acids, and quite low in omega-3s, a phenomenon that has occurred with the shift towards industrialized and processed food. Omega-6 fatty acids are the primary fatty acid in many vegetable oils, such a corn oil and soy oil, often the cooking fats of choice in packaged and restaurant food.
Long chained omega-3 fatty acids are found in fish, seafood, and grass-fed beef. Typically, these are not foods that come to mind as staples of the standard American diet. Grass fed beef omega-3 content varies greatly, but generally contains 100mg of long-chained omega-3 fatty acids per 100g serving, much less than an equivalent serving of fatty fish. This highlights the importance of educating patients about meat quality and alternatives, such as grass-fed beef, which is generally more nutrient dense than conventionally-raised beef. Omega-3 fatty acids have been shown to be effective as either stand-alone or adjunctive treatment for ADHD, major depressive disorder, bipolar depression, and PTSD. In addition, an elevated omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio in the blood has been associated with major depressive disorder and ADHD. There is some evidence that reducing the omega-6 to omega-3 ratio with omega-3 supplements lead to improvement in symptoms of ADHD. Several possible biological mechanisms underlie these associations, i.e., the same enzymes are required to convert both short chain omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids to their long chain biologically active versions. Thus, excess omega-6 could interfere with the production of omega-3s by limiting the conversion to the longer chain forms. These foods are not rich sources of nutrients crucial for brain health. When considering brain health, fish and seafood are among the most nutrient dense foods that one can eat. Protein consumption (from foods like fish, beef, chicken, turkey, tofu, beans, eggs and unsweetened yogurt) has been linked to higher levels of dopamine and norepinephrine, which are brain chemicals that play a role in your mood, motivation and concentration. The Mediterranean diet has gained significant attention for decreasing symptoms of depression, with key components being increased intake of vegetables, fruit, omega-3-rich fish, nuts, legumes and olive oil. Consuming a diet based on whole, unrefined foods with enough protein, healthy fat and fibre also helps to keep blood sugar stable after meals, which has been linked to improvements in mood and anxiety. Any mention of olive oil, wine, and vegetables when speaking about nutrition leads to thoughts about the Mediterranean diet. This dietary pattern is based on the traditional cooking style of countries bordering the Mediterranean
 
Sea and is rich in fish, olive oil, legumes, and whole grains. It also contains small, but regular amounts of red wine, cheese, and yogurt.

Mediterranean diet has been associated with decreased incidence and prevalence of depression. an attempt to explore the potential mechanisms to explain this association, one research group looked at brain derived neurotrophic factor or BDNF. BDNF is an important neurochemical that is active in many areas of the brain. It plays a role in many crucial functions such as neuroplasticity, neuronal survival, and growth and differentiation of new neurons and synapses.

Low serum levels of BDNF have been found in a number of mental disorders including major depressive disorder, PTSD, Schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s dementia. BDNF has also been implicated in the mechanism of action of anti-depressant medications. One prospective study examined the impact of diet on plasma BDNF levels in humans. Participants were randomized to follow one of three diets: the American Heart Association guidelines, a Mediterranean diet augmented with olive oil, and a Mediterranean diet augmented with nuts. After three years of follow up, the Mediterranean diet with nuts group had a relative risk of 0.22 (0.05–0.90) of having a very low plasma BDNF level. What is more, individuals in this group who had depression at baseline had significantly higher mean plasma levels of BDNF at the end of the study.

Another aspect on the frontier of the link between diet and mental health is the microbiome. Fermented foods have been part of the human diet since the Palaeolithic period and they remain part of the dietary practices of most known traditional diets today.

These types of foods are commonly referred to as probiotic since they contain microorganisms that positively influence health. Prebiotics, on the other hand include non- digestible fibre, which stimulates the growth and or activity of these beneficial microorganisms. The impact of the microbiome on mental health is an emerging area of research that is beyond the scope of this article. Suffice it to say that the microbiome provides another link between diet and mental health since short-term dietary changes can induce species level changes to intestinal microbes.

Therefore, it appears that dietary pattern can influence mental health through a number of mechanisms. Basic building blocks of the brain such as monoamine neurotransmitters, myelin, and neuronal membranes depend on adequate nutrient intake. Food choice influences neuroplastic processes via effects on BDNF expression and systemic inflammation via omega-3 to omega-6 ratio. Finally, food is the primary arbiter of the microbiome, an emerging area of research in general and mental health.

6.	Other Nutritional Factors and Mental Health
Another very important topic when it comes to mental health and nutrition is gut health. The gut is implicated in immune function, neurotransmitter synthesis and function, inflammation, pain syndromes, and general brain health.  Notably, gut bacteria produce
 
hundreds of neurochemicals that the brain uses to regulate basic physiological processes as well as mental processes such as learning, memory and mood. Additionally, our microbiome is essential for digestion, absorption, vitamin production, controlling growth of harmful microorganisms, and keeping the integrity of our intestinal cells. Suffice to say there is so much research coming out about this connection that in recent years the gut was named ‘the second brain.’ When the gut’s microbiome is disturbed, which happens due to a plethora of reasons, our brain suffers and often results in mood disturbance. The 100 trillion microbes that make the GI tract their playground is critical to health. Gut bacteria regulate digestion and metabolism. They extract and make vitamins and other nutrients from food that you eat. They program the body's immune system.Gut bacteria also produce hundreds of neurochemicals that the brain uses to regulate basic physiological processes as well as mental processes such as learning, memory and mood. For example, gut bacteria manufacture 80 to 95 percent of the body's supply of serotonin, which influences both mood and GI activity.Our guts and brain are physically linked via the vagus nerve, and the two are able to send messages to one another. While the gut is able to influence emotional behaviour in the brain, the brain can also alter the type of bacteria living in the gut.
7.	Healthy Diet
A healthy diet affects brain health by; Boosting brain development. Changing brain proteins and enzymes to increase neural transmitters, which are the connections between brain cells. Increasing good gut bacteria, which promotes a healthy gut biome, which decreases inflammation. Inflammation is known to affect both cognition and mood. Raising serotonin levels through various food enzymes, which improves mood.Recently there have been major advances addressing the influence certain foods have on psychological well-being. Increasing these nutrients could not only increase personal well-being but could also decrease the cost of mental health issues all around the world.
Healthy food-1. Complex carbohydrates
One way to increase psychological well-being is by fuelling brain cells correctly through the carbohydrates in our food. Complex carbohydrates are sugars made up of large molecules contained within fibre and starch. They are found in fruit, vegetables, and wholegrains and are beneficial for brain health as they release glucose slowly into our system. This helps to stabilise our mood.Simple carbohydrates found in sugary snacks and drinks create sugar highs and lows that rapidly increase and decrease feelings of happiness and produce a negative effect on our psychological well-being.We often use these types of sugary foods to comfort us when we’re feeling down. But this can create an addiction-like response in the brain, similar to illicit drugs that increase mood for the short term but have negative long- term effects.Increasing intake of complex carbohydrates and decreasing sugary drinks and snacks could be the first step in increased happiness and well-being.
Healthy food 2. Antioxidants
Oxidation is a normal process our cells carry out to function.Oxidation produces energy for our body and brain. Unfortunately, this process also creates oxidative stress and more of this happens in the brain than any other part of the body.Chemicals that promote happiness
 
in the brain such as dopamine and serotonin are reduced due to oxidation and this can contribute to a decrease in mental health. Antioxidants found in brightly coloured foods such as fruit and vegetables act as a defence against oxidative stress and inflammation in the brain and body. Antioxidants also repair oxidative damage and scavenge free radicals that cause cell damage in the brain. Eating more antioxidant-rich foods can increase the feel-good chemicals in our brain and heighten mood.
Healthy food3- Omega 3
Omega 3 are polyunsaturated fatty acids that are involved in the process of converting food into energy. They are important for the health of the brain and helps to produce feel-good chemicals dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine. Omega 3 fatty acids are commonly found in oily fish, nuts, seeds, leafy vegetables, eggs, and in grass fed meats. Omega 3 has been found to increase brain functioning, can slow down the progression of dementia and may improve symptoms of depression. Omega 3 are essential nutrients that are not readily produced by the body and can only be found in the foods we eat, so it’s imperative we include more foods high in omega 3 in our everyday diet
Healthy food 4-B vitamins
B vitamins play a large role in the production of our brain’s happiness chemicals serotonin and dopamine and can be found in green vegetables, beans, bananas, and beetroot. High amounts of vitamins B6, B12, and folate in the diet have been known to protect against depression and too low amounts to increase the severity of symptoms. Vitamin B deficiency can result in a reduced production of happiness chemicals in our brain and can lead to the onset of low mood that could lead to mental health issues over a long period. Increasing B vitamins in our diet could increase the production of the feel-good chemicals in our brain which promote happiness and well-being.
Healthy food 5-Prebiotics and Probiotic
The trillions of good and bad bacteria living in our tummies also influence our mood, behaviour and brain health. Chemical messengers produced in our stomach influence our emotions, appetite and our reactions to stressful situations.Prebiotics and probiotics found in yoghurt, cheese and fermented foods such as kombucha, sauerkraut and kimchi work on the same pathways in the brain as antidepressant medications and studies have found they might have similar effects.Prebiotics and Probiotics have been found to suppress immune reactions in the body, reduce inflammation in the brain, decrease depressed and anxious states and elevate happy emotions.
Incorporating these foods into our diet will not only increase our physical health but will have beneficial effects on our mental health, including reducing our risk of disorders such as depression and anxiety.
8.	Brain Foods
8.1.	Salmon-It’s a “fatty” fish, containing high amounts of omega-3 fatty acids, which have been linked to a reduction in mental disorders such as depression. Omega-3s have been
 
shown to boost learning and memory as well. Salmon also has a naturally high-occurring amount of vitamin D, which is often added to foods and has been linked to lower rates of depression.
8.2.	Chicken-Chicken, like turkey, is a delicious lean-protein choice containing the amino acid tryptophan.help your body produce serotonin — which is vital in helping our brain manage your mood, fight depression and help maintain strong memory.
8.3.	Whole Grains-Many types of food fall under this category, like beans, soy, oats and wild rice. While your body and brain utilize carbohydrates for energy, too often we consume simple carbs, which lead to blood sugar spikes.Foods classified as whole grains contain complex carbohydrates, which leads to glucose being produced more slowly, as a more even and consistent source of energy. Also, whole grains help the brain absorb tryptophan, which means that when eaten in conjunction with foods like chicken and turkey, one can further reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety while boosting brain function.
8.4.	Avocados-Avocados are full of vitamin K and folate, which help protect our brain against stroke. They also provide a boost to your memory and concentration. Avocados serve up a high dose of lutein, too, which studies have linked to improved brain function.Avocadocontains Oleic Acid, which gives brainpower, Avocados are power foods because, again, they contain healthy fat that our brain needs in order to run smoothly. Three-fourths of the calories of an avocado are from fat, mostly monounsaturated fat, in the form of oleic acid. An average avocado also contains 4 grams of protein, higher than other fruits, and is filled with vitamin K, different kinds of vitamin B (B9, B6, and B5), vitamin C, and vitamin E12. Finally, they are low in sugar and high in dietary fibre, containing about 11 grams each.
8.5.	Spinach-Spinach and other leafy greens provide your brain with solid amounts of folic acid, which has been shown to be a great deterrent to depression. It also helps fight off insomnia, which is heavily linked to mental impairments and can help reduce dementia in older adults.
8.6.	Yogurt-Yogurt and other products containing active cultures are excellent sources of probiotics. Often associated with digestive health, probiotics have been shown to play a role in reducing stress and anxiety.Yogurt can also provide you with potassium and magnesium, which helps oxygen reach the brain, further improving its ability to function.
8.7.	Nuts-like salmon, nuts are an excellent source of omega-3 fatty acids, helping to fight depression. Cashews, for example, help provide oxygen to the brain with a dose of magnesium.Walnuts are one of the richest plant sources of omega-3 fatty acids, and numerous studies have demonstrated how omega-3 fatty acids support brain function and reduce depression symptoms. Nuts contain a compound called phenylalanine, which is shown to help the brain produce dopamine and other neurotransmitters that boost your mood. Phenylalanine has also been linked to a reduction in the symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease.
 
8.8.	Olive Oil-Pure, extra virgin olive oil has been quite popular as of late as a part of healthy Mediterranean-style diets. Olive oil contains polyphenols, which help to remove the effects of proteins linked to Alzheimer’s Disease. It can also help improve learning and memory.
8.9.	Tomatoes-The source of a tomato’s red hue, lycopene is classified as an all-around beneficial phytonutrient. One of the many health boosts it provides is in the fight against brain disease. It’s been shown to delay the onset and progression of Alzheimer’s Disease, fighting off cell damage. In addition, lycopene has been shown to help with memory, attention, logic and concentration. Tomatoes are packed with depression Fighters.Folic acid can prevent an excess of homocysteine — which restricts the production of important neurotransmitters like serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine — from forming in the body.
8.10.	Beans-Beans have satisfyingly high mood-Stabilizing Fibre.“Beans, beans, good for the heart. The more you eat, the more you smile.” They can act as anti-diabetes and weight-loss foods.
8.11.	Onions-onions are layered with Cancer-Fighting Allium.“Eating onions and garlic frequently is associated with a reduced risk of cancers of the digestive tract,” explains Fuhrman. “These vegetables also contain high concentrations of anti-inflammatory flavonoid antioxidants that contribute to their anticancer properties.”
8.12.	Seeds-seeds are small but mighty Sources of Omega-3s. Flaxseeds, hemp seeds, and chia seeds are especially good for your mood because they are rich in omega-3 fatty acids. Fuhrman writes, “Not only do seeds add their own spectrum of unique disease-fighting substances to the dietary landscape, but the fat in seeds increases the absorption of antioxidants.
8.13.	Apples-Like berries, apples are high in antioxidants, which can help to prevent and repair oxidation damage and inflammation on the cellular level. They are also full of soluble fibre, which balances blood sugar swings.
8.14.	Dark Chocolate-Dark chocolate contains high levels of flavonoids, a type of antioxidant. It has been shown to boost attention and memory, enhance mood and help fight cognitive decline in older adults. Just remember, chocolate should still be consumed in moderation.
8.15.	Mushrooms-Here are two good reasons why mushrooms are good for our mental health. First, their chemical properties oppose insulin, which helps lower blood sugar levels, evening out your mood. They also are like a probiotic in that they promote healthy gut bacteria. And since the nerve cells in our gut manufacture 80 to 90 percent of our body’s serotonin — the critical neurotransmitter that keeps us sane.
8.16.	Berries-Blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, and blackberries are some of the highest antioxidant foods available to us. Antioxidants help significantly in lowering depression.
9.	The Best Foods for Mental Health
 
9.1.	Spices To Support Mental Health: saffron, turmeric (curcumin), saffron plus curcumin, peppermint (for attention), cinnamon (for attention, ADHD, irritability).
9.2.	Dopamine-Rich Foodsfor focus and motivation: turmeric, theanine from green tea, lentils, fish, lamb, chicken, turkey, beef, eggs, nuts and seeds (pumpkin and sesame), high protein veggies (such as broccoli and spinach), protein powders.
9.3.	Serotonin-Rich Foods:for mood, sleep, pain and craving control: Combine tryptophan- containing foods, such as eggs, turkey, seafood, chickpeas, nuts and seeds (building blocks for serotonin), with healthy carbohydrates, such as sweet potatoes and quinoa, to elicit a short-term insulin response that drives tryptophan into the brain. Dark chocolate also increases serotonin.
9.4.	Gaba-Rich Foods:for anti-anxiety: broccoli, almonds, walnuts, lentils, bananas, beef liver, brown rice, halibut, gluten-free whole oats, oranges, rice bran, spinach.
9.5.	Choline-Rich Foods: shrimp, eggs, scallops, sardines, chicken, turkey, tuna, cod, beef, collard greens, Brussels sprouts.
9.7.	Omega-3-Rich Foods: to support nerve cell membranes and serotonin. Helps manage moods and inflammation.
9.8.	Antioxidant-Rich Foods: acai fruit, parsley, cocoa powder, raspberries, walnuts, blueberries, cranberries, kidney beans, blackberries, pomegranates, chocolate, olive, and hemp oil (not for cooking at high temperatures), and green tea.
9.9.	Magnesium-Rich Foods: for anxiety: pumpkin and sunflower seeds, almonds, spinach, Swiss chard, sesame seeds, beet greens, summer squash, quinoa, black beans, and cashews.
9.10.	Zinc-Rich Foods: oysters, beef, lamb, spinach, shiitake and cremini mushrooms, asparagus, sesame and pumpkin seeds.
9.11.	Vitamin B6, B12, Folate-Rich Foods: leafy greens, cabbage, bok choy, bell peppers, cauliflower, lentils, asparagus, garbanzo beans, spinach, broccoli, parsley, cauliflower, salmon, sardines, lamb, tuna, beef, and eggs.
9.12.	Prebiotic-Rich Foods: dandelion greens, asparagus, chia seeds, beans, cabbage, psyllium, artichokes, raw garlic, onions, leeks, root vegetables (sweet potatoes, yams, squash, jicama, beets, carrots, turnips).
9.13.	Probiotic-Rich Foods: brined vegetables (not vinegar), kimchi, sauerkraut, kefir, miso soup, pickles, spirulina, chlorella, blue-green algae, kombucha tea.
10.	Conclusion
Nutrition and psychology are linked, a healthy diet is associated with better mood and less depressive symptoms. A diet high in refined/processed foods is associated with increased risk of depressive symptoms and lower mood. Nutritional deficiencies lead to mental health disorders and cognitive impairment. Sugar consumption has deleterious effects on mental, physical, and cognitive health.In conclusion, the food we eat is not only important for our
 
physical health, but also for our mental health. Although more studies are needed to help understand how and why this may be the case, there is now plenty of research that shows what we eat can influence our mood. This suggests diet may be able to play an important role in the prevention and treatment of general mood related disorders.
Abstract: Anxiety disorders are the most common group of mental disorders. There is mounting evidence demonstrating the importance of nutrition in the development and progression of mental disorders such as depression; however, less is known about the role of nutrition in anxiety disorders. This scoping review sought to systematically map the existing literature on anxiety disorders and nutrition in order to identify associations between dietary factors and anxiety symptoms or disorder prevalence as well as identify gaps and opportunities for further research. The review followed estab- lished methodological approaches for scoping reviews. Due to the large volume of results, an online program (Abstrackr) with artificial intelligence features was used. Studies reporting an association between a dietary constituent and anxiety symptoms or disorders were counted and presented in figures. A total of 55,914 unique results were identified. After a full-text review, 1541 articles met criteria for inclusion. Analysis revealed an association between less anxiety and more fruits and vegetables, omega-3 fatty acids, “healthy” dietary patterns, caloric restriction, breakfast consumption, ketogenic diet, broad-spectrum micronutrient supplementation, zinc, magnesium and selenium, probiotics, and a range of phytochemicals. Analysis revealed an association between higher levels of anxiety and high-fat diet, inadequate tryptophan and dietary protein, high intake of sugar and refined carbohydrates, and “unhealthy” dietary patterns. Results are limited by a large percentage of animal and observational studies. Only 10% of intervention studies involved participants with anxiety disorders, limiting the applicability of the findings. High quality intervention studies involving participants with anxiety disorders are warranted.

Keywords: nutrition; diet; food; anxiety; mental health; psychiatry; nutritional science; dietetics


 

 

 
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/).
 
1.	Introduction
The term anxiety describes the experience of worry, apprehension, or nervousness in association with physical, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms. Anxiety may be experi- enced occasionally as part of normal life and may be adaptive if it increases preparedness for novel situations. If anxiety symptoms are persistent, excessive, or interfere with func- tioning, they can become pathological [1].
Several anxiety disorders have been defined. Generalized anxiety disorder involves excessive worry in multiple domains and associated physical symptoms that are present for at least six months leading to clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning [1].
 


 
Nutrients 2021, 13, 4418. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13124418	https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 


Panic disorder is characterized by unexpected and recurrent panic attacks and at least one month of persistent worry about having a subsequent panic attack or significant behavior changes related to the attack [2]. Agoraphobia involves feelings of intense fear of situations or spaces where escape may be difficult or help may not be available in the event or panic or other incapacitating symptoms [3]. Social anxiety disorder involves marked anxiety and fear of a social situation where an individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by others [4]. Specific phobia is an excessive fear of specific object or situation [5].
Anxiety disorders exert a significant burden at both an individual and societal level. Individuals with anxiety disorders report a high degree of psychological distress, sig- nificant disability [6] and a reduction in quality of life [7]. The presence of an anxiety disorder is associated with higher use of both primary care, emergency room visits, and specialist healthcare services [8]. These disorders are also highly prevalent. The national comorbidities study established the lifetime prevalence of any anxiety disorder at 31.2%, the highest of any category of psychiatric illnesses [9].
The treatment approaches most frequently used in the management of anxiety disor- ders are psychotherapy and psychopharmacology [10]. While many patients find these therapies beneficial, a significant number of individuals report that these treatment options are not accessible, tolerable, or effective in providing adequate relief of anxiety symp- toms [11]. For these reasons, there is interest in the evaluation of adjunctive or alternative therapeutic approaches.
Nutritional psychiatry is an emerging field of study related to the use of nutritional interventions in the prevention and treatment of mental health disorders. Despite increas- ing evidence of beneficial effects, nutritional recommendations are provided to psychiatric patients infrequently in clinical practice. Recently, high quality intervention studies have demonstrated an antidepressant effect of nutritional interventions [12,13]. However, the amount of research on anxiety disorders lags behind that of mood disorders [14,15]. There is a clear lack of studies delivering diet counselling, education, or food as an intervention to individuals with diagnosed anxiety disorders as well as systematic synthesis of the existing literature on the relationship between dietary factors and anxiety symptoms or disorders. The objective of the present review was to systematically map out the body of existing literature on anxiety symptoms/disorders and nutrition in order to identify nutritional factors associated with higher or lower levels of anxiety and to identify knowledge gaps and opportunities for further research.
2.	Materials and Methods
The review followed established methodological approaches for scoping reviews using the framework presented by Arskey and O’Malley for the conduct of scoping reviews [16]. Scoping reviews aim to identify and describe the breadth of literature on a topic when it is either highly complex, involves a broad array of study designs, or when a comprehensive review is being completed for the first time; all of these factors apply to the present review. Scoping reviews aim to map key concepts in a field of study and the available types of evidence. The review is completed in a way that is systematic, highly rigorous, and transparent in order to minimize bias. The protocol used in the present study was adapted from a similar project completed by the authors on the topic of diet and psychosis [17].
An extensive a priori search strategy was developed and executed with the guidance of
an experienced medical librarian. Using the Ovid platform, we searched Ovid MEDLINE®, including Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, and Embase Classic + Embase. We used controlled vocabulary (e.g., “Anxiety Disorders”, “Nutritional Physiological Phenomena”, “Food”) and keywords (e.g., anxiety, nutrition, diet). We adjusted vocabulary and syntax as necessary across the databases. There were no language or date restrictions on any of the searches, but we removed opinion pieces (e.g., editorials) from the results. We performed the searches on 25 March 2020. The full search, as executed, is available in Supplemental File S1.
 


Screening of abstracts and titles was completed using the online open-source program Abstrackr [18] which allowed for concurrent and blind duplicate screening as well as tagging by dietary constituent. Manual screening was completed until the program’s artificial intelligence predicted the presence of additional relevant studies as unlikely. Previous testing of this program has demonstrated that the likelihood of missing relevant studies is very low [18–20]. As an extra precaution, once screening had reached the point where Abstrackr’s prediction score reported ‘zero additional studies likely to be relevant’, and no studies were being identified as being relevant, an additional 100 articles were screened in each section before screening was stopped. Screening of abstracts and titles was completed in duplicate. Disagreement was resolved by consensus.
Studies were eligible for inclusion if they involved the evaluation of changes in the level of anxiety symptoms or the presence/absence of anxiety disorders in humans or animal models as well as assessing or modifying a component of participant diet. This included assessment or modification of dietary patterns, individual foods, supplements, or natural health products that provide an active constituent naturally occurring in the general North American diet. Studies were ineligible if they assessed or administered herbal medicines (apart from those used for culinary purposes in the general North American diet) or constituents which are not typically found in significant quantities in the human diet (i.e., St. John’s Wort, GABA, or S-adenosylmethionine) or if they assessed levels of endogenously produced dietary components (i.e., cholesterol, vitamin D, or non-essential amino acids) in the absence of supplementation or measurement of intake. Eligible study designs included human observational and experimental studies, animal studies, and meta- analyses. Studies were excluded if they assessed the impact of maternal diet on offspring anxiety levels. Review articles, opinion papers, letters, and systematic reviews (without meta-analysis) were excluded, as were non-English language papers or inaccessible papers in cases where the abstract contained insufficient information for data extraction.
Full text screening was completed concurrently with data extraction. Data extraction was completed using piloted extraction templates developed for a similar scoping review conducted by the study authors and double checked by MA for accuracy [17]. Analysis was completed by sorting the studies with common interventions and methodology types and counting the number of studies reporting an association with increased or decreased anxiety symptoms/disorders, or no association. These data were used to create figures that communicate an overview of the evidence on each topic. Studies reporting a statistically significant improvement in at least one subpopulation or measure of anxiety symptomatol- ogy were categorized as “associated with decreased anxiety”. Studies reporting an increase in anxiety symptoms or prevalence in at least one subpopulation or measure of anxiety symptomatology were categorized as “associated with increased anxiety”. Studies that reported no significant change in anxiety symptoms or prevalence were categorized as “no association with anxiety”. A small number of studies which reported mixed findings such as a combination of increased and decreased anxiety symptoms were not included in the figures. In order to allow concise display and the comparison of all studies, the number of studies reporting an association between improved symptoms with higher intake of a nutrient were combined with studies reporting and association between worse symptoms with lower intake of the nutrient. Counts are depicted in figures. The figures are oriented so that they report the relationship between higher intake of the diet constituent with anxiety. Within each section, a narrative summary was completed to highlight trends, gaps, and areas that warrant further study. When available, narrative summaries also reported on proposed mechanisms and safety. Finally, we created a list of dietary factors that, based on the review findings, may to be associated with less anxiety and more anxiety symptoms/disorders. This process of categorization was done based on the following criteria related to the volume and consistency of evidence. Dietary factors were included in these two categories when there were at least five studies reporting on the relationship with anxiety, and the majority of the data points (>60%) showed a consistent association.
 


These criteria were developed post hoc as the volume, and consistency of the evidence was unknown at the time of protocol development.
3.	Results
3.1.	Search Results
The search identified 55,914 unique results that were screened in two phases: by title/abstract and by full text. The study authors manually screened 13,286 results while Abstrackr’s artificial intelligence screened the remaining results. Following title and abstract screening, 2213 articles were included.
Seventeen articles could not be retrieved in full text. During full text screening, an additional 655 studies were excluded (Supplemental File S2). 1541 studies were included in the final data analysis (Figure 1, Supplemental File S3).


Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram. AI: artificial intelligence.
3.2.	Study Characteristics
More than half of the studies in our analysis were conducted using animal models (n = 859) (Figure 2). The animal studies were primarily conducted in rodents (97%) with the remaining 3% of studies conducted in zebrafish, pigs, lemurs, monkeys, cats, horses, and tilapia.
 


 
Figure 2. Distribution of included studies by methodology (count, percent).
The observational studies included 14 case reports; in 11 reports, subjects had anx- iety disorders or elevated anxiety symptoms at baseline (Figure 3). In total, the reports described 44 individual cases. An additional 255 publications described cross-sectional, prospective, or retrospective observational studies. One meta-analysis of observational studies was conducted [21]. Of the observational studies, 88% were cross-sectional in design and 13 studies (5%) specifically included individuals with anxiety disorders or elevated anxiety symptoms. Nutrient intake was assessed in 201 studies while nutrient levels, in various body tissues, were measured in 40 studies. Sample size varied widely, from 14 to 296,121 participants (Mean: 6315.7, SD: 28,423.9).


Figure 3. Types of observational studies (count, percent).
Regarding experimental studies, 395 met criteria for inclusion as well as an addi- tional 18 meta-analyses of experimental studies. Of the individual studies, the number of participants ranged from 3 to 2730 (Mean: 99.3, SD: 198.3). Of the 395 trials, 335 (85%) in-
cluded a comparison arm, 312 (79%) utilized randomization, and 23 (61%) utilized blinding. Thirty-nine trials (10%) included participants with anxiety disorders or elevated anxiety
 


symptoms. An additional 57 trials assessed anxiety in participants with other psychi- atric illnesses while the remaining studies included participants with medical illnesses or healthy participants (Figure 4). Excluding the studies that assessed the immediate impact of food on anxiety symptoms (n = 72), the average duration of the experimental studies was
15.8 weeks (SD: 18.3 weeks). Most of the studies (n = 331) provided the dietary intervention
without co-interventions. An exercise co-intervention was delivered in 32 studies, while 20 included a psychosocial component and ten co-administered a medication. Sixty-nine percent of experimental studies identified a primary outcome related to mental health.

Figure 4. Participant populations in human experimental studies (count, percent).
3.3.	Dietary Patterns
Many studies were identified that assessed the impact of dietary patterns on anxiety symptoms severity or anxiety disorder prevalence including both animal models (n = 101) and human studies with observational (n = 102) and experimental (n = 84) designs. Dietary pattern studies evaluated the impact of combinations of foods or patterns of eating. Studies looked at both the types of foods that were consumed (Figure 5) and the quantity and timing of food consumption (Figure 6). Because studies may have defined specific dietary patterns differently, it is noted that significant heterogeneity exists within each category. In general, “Healthy” diet patterns were described as diets aligned with generally accepted principles of healthy eating. Many involved the calculation of a healthy eating score or index and were defined by higher intake of vegetables, fruit, whole grains, fish, legumes, and unprocessed meat. Diets or dietary patterns defined as “Unhealthy” or “Western” generally included higher intake of processed foods, sugar and sweetened foods, soft drinks, fried foods, processed meats, “junk food”, and “fast food”. In the animal studies, the “Western” or “Cafeteria” diet included a combination of high fat and high carbohydrate, in particular, high saturated fat and high refined carbohydrates. In many cases, the diet was designed to be highly palatable and to induce obesity [22,23].
 


 

Figure 5. Studies assessing the composition of dietary patterns. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety.
■	No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.

Figure 6. Studies assessing the amount of food consumed or timing of eating. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety.
■	Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
The animal studies reported a mixture of anxiogenic and anxiolytic effects follow- ing administration of the “unhealthy”, “cafeteria”, or “Western” style eating patterns. Predominantly anxiolytic effects were seen following caloric restriction and fasting.
Observational studies showed an association between lower anxiety symptom severity or disorder prevalence and “healthy” diet patterns, the Mediterranean diet, traditional diets, the vegetarian diet, consumption of breakfast, anti-inflammatory diet patterns, and increased diet variety. Higher anxiety symptom severity or disorder prevalence was associ- ated with “unhealthy” diet patterns, caloric restriction, and snacking. It is noted that among the observational studies assessing the relationship between vegetarianism and anxiety symptoms, two of the three studies that reported an increase in anxiety were prospective in design while all of the studies reporting an association between the diet pattern and less anxiety were cross-sectional in design. Two case reports described improvement in anxiety symptom severity following multimodal interventions with a dietary component. One involved the elimination of “inflammatory foods” in combination with exercise and psy- chological treatment [24]. The other delivered a vegan diet in combination with fruit and vegetable juice, nutritional supplements, exercise and stress management techniques [25]. Of the experimental studies delivering an intervention that promoted healthy eat-
ing behaviors, twenty reported a reduction in anxiety symptoms while sixteen did not
 


observe a significant effect. Only two of these trials recruited individuals with anxiety disorders [26,27]; the remaining studies recruited individuals with medical illnesses or healthy participants. One randomized controlled trial enrolled participants with moderate to severe anxiety disorders and assessed the impact of dietary counselling, in combination with a multivitamin and a herbal remedy, compared to a psychosocial intervention, and re- ported a significant improvement in anxiety symptoms with the combination intervention as compared to the psychosocial intervention [26]. Another study randomized individuals with anxiety and/or depressive disorders to either dietician consultations or an attention control intervention; significant improvement was seen in both treatment groups [27]. Nine of thirteen studies promoting caloric restriction reported an improvement in anxiety symp- toms. While one of the studies recruited participants with elevated anxiety symptoms [28], all involved overweight and obese participants. A meta-analysis of studies delivering caloric restriction to adults with obesity did not find a significant reduction in anxiety symptoms [29] while a meta-analysis on the same topic that included child and adolescent populations did report a reduction in anxiety [30].
3.4.	Carbohydrates
One trend that was observed among the carbohydrate studies was a relationship between higher intake of simple or refined carbohydrates, higher glycemic index diet, or sugar intake, and higher levels of anxiety (Figure 7). This association was reported by several animal and observational studies. Similarly, 75% of the 12 animal studies and the only human experimental trial assessing the impact of artificial sweeteners (aspartame, saccharin, and sorbitol) reported an increase in anxiety symptoms. One observational study reported on the relationship between fiber and anxiety; at long term follow up two to three years after completing a program aimed at increasing fiber intake, 14 irritable bowel syndrome patients reported lower anxiety symptoms [31].

Figure 7. Studies assessing dietary carbohydrates and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety.
■	No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
Very limited research has been undertaken in the form of human experimental studies that sought to reduce carbohydrate intake (n = 4); none included participants with anxiety disorders. Of four studies, one study involving obese or overweight participants reported an improvement in anxiety symptoms following a low carbohydrate diet. Eight studies evaluated the effect of consuming sweetened drinks on anxiety in humans. These studies administered carbohydrate-rich drinks to patients undergoing surgical procedures and measured the immediate effects on anxiety symptom severity, often in comparison with pre-operative fasting. The findings of these studies were mixed.
 


3.5.	Protein
Limited research has investigated the effects of different levels of dietary protein on anxiety symptom severity or disorder prevalence (Figure 8). Two thirds of the 12 ani- mal studies assessing the impact of protein malnutrition reported a worsening of anxiety symptoms. Four human experimental studies delivered a high protein diet; three studies, involving participants without anxiety disorders, reported no effect on anxiety symptom severity. One experimental study involving three participants with elevated anxiety symp- toms reported improvement following a high protein, low carbohydrate diet [32]. A very small amount of research has been completed comparing plant and animal sources of pro- tein. One observational study reported a benefit with higher intake of animal protein [33], the other reported no difference [34]. The food additive monosodium glutamate (MSG), a modified amino acid, was associated with increased levels of anxiety in animal models.

Figure 8. Studies assessing protein and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
There was an association between higher anxiety symptoms and tryptophan depletion, among human experimental studies. Supplementation of tryptophan resulted in decreased anxiety symptoms in both animal and experimental studies. Of the studies assessing the ef- fect of tryptophan depletion, 10 involved individuals with anxiety disorders; five reported no effect while five reported a worsening of anxiety symptoms. Of the studies adminis- tering a tryptophan supplement, two involved individuals with anxiety disorders [35,36]; both studies reported improvement.
3.6.	Fats
Compared with other categories of nutrients, a large number of animal studies have investigated the effects of increased intake of fat on rodent models of anxiety (Figure 9). Many animal studies (n = 39) have reported an anxiogenic effect of a high fat diet. A smaller number have reported a similar effect from diets high in cholesterol (n = 5) and trans fats (n = 6). A large number of animal studies have reported anxiolytic effects of omega-3 fatty acids (n = 35), Docosahexaenoic acid (n = 9), Eicosapentaenoic acid (n = 3), and alpha-linolenic acid (n = 4). Human observational studies reported an association between higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids and lower levels of anxiety.
 


 
Figure 9. Studies assessing dietary fats and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
Twenty-two human experimental studies have measured changes in anxiety symp- toms following supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids. Eleven studies reported an improvement in anxiety symptoms, the remaining studies were equivocal. Two of three meta-analyses of trials delivering omega-3 fatty acid supplements reported benefit to anxiety symptoms [37–39]. While nine of the experimental studies included participants with psychiatric disorders such as eating disorders, substance use disorders and ADHD, only one trial involved participants with anxiety disorders [40]. In this trial, researchers provided polyunsaturated fatty acids (omega-3 and omega-6) to 126 sufferers of test anxiety and reported an improvement in symptom severity after three weeks.
3.7.	Vitamins
A large number of animal studies (n = 56) have investigated the effects of vitamins B, C, D, E, choline, and folic acid and reported primarily anxiolytic effects (Figure 10). Among the human observational studies, the majority of studies assessing vitamin C, vitamin E, and broad-spectrum micronutrients reported an association with less anxiety symptoms while the majority of the studies assessing levels or intake of B vitamins and folic acid reported no association with anxiety symptom severity. Additionally, five case reports reported improvement in anxiety symptoms following broad-spectrum micronutrient sup- plementation.

Figure 10. Studies assessing vitamins and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
Among the human experimental studies, several studies reported improved anxiety symptoms following supplementation of vitamin C (n = 3) and broad-spectrum micronu-
 


trients (n = 12); mixed findings were reported by studies assessing vitamin D, B vitamins, and folic acid. Two human experimental studies involved participants with anxiety disor- ders. These trials delivered vitamin D [41] and two different broad-spectrum vitamin and micronutrient formulas [42], one assessed at a low and high dose. Both studies reported a reduction in anxiety symptoms.
A number of studies were identified that delivered combination natural health prod- ucts to human (n = 22) or animal (n = 11) participants. The formulas included combinations of vitamins (typically two or three) or combinations of fatty acids, vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and amino acids. Among the human studies, 16 of 22 reported a significant improvement in anxiety symptoms. Among the animal studies, eight of 11 reported a significant improvement. The remaining studies reported no change. Two human trials involved participant with anxiety disorders or elevated anxiety symptoms. One included individuals with GAD [43], one included individuals with high trait anxiety levels [44]. The former delivered a combination of three vitamins (A, C, and E) and reported an im- provement. The latter delivered a combination of probiotics, B vitamins and proteins and did not find a reduction in anxiety symptoms; however, other self-reported and biological markers of stress improved.
3.8.	Minerals
The minerals that were assessed for an impact on anxiety symptoms in animal models most frequently are zinc, magnesium, manganese, and selenium (Figure 11). The animal studies reported a largely consistent anti-anxiety effect from supplementing these nutrients. The observational studies assessing tissue levels of magnesium most frequently reported no association with anxiety levels or anxiety disorder prevalence. Observational studies assessing tissue levels of zinc reported a combination of protective effects and no association while the observational studies assessing selenium primarily reported an association between higher intake and lower symptom severity. A small number of observational studies reported an association between higher copper or sodium and increased anxiety symptoms or disorder prevalence.

Figure 11. Studies assessing minerals and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
A limited number of intervention studies have delivered minerals in supplemental form, including selenium, zinc, magnesium, iron, copper, and calcium. All four studies that administered selenium supplements reported improvement in anxiety symptoms. Studies administering other minerals reported a mixture of anti-anxiety effects and no effect. Only one experimental study included participants with anxiety disorders [45]. This open label study provided zinc to 38 participants for eight weeks and reported an improvement in anxiety symptoms.
 


3.9.	Vegetables and Fruit
The results of the studies related to vegetables and fruit were largely positive (Figure 12). The majority (64%, n = 60) of the studies were conducted in animal models. These trials involved the administration of single fruits or vegetables and 58 of 60 reported a reduction in anxiety symptom severity. The most commonly studied foods included citrus fruits (n = 13), grape (n = 7), berries (n = 6), pomegranate (n = 6), fennel (n = 4), and lettuce (n = 4) with a wide variety of vegetables and fruits used in the remaining studies. Several observational studies reported an association between higher fruit and vegetable intake and lower levels of anxiety symptoms or disorder prevalence. A small number of intervention studies increased intake of individual vegetable or fruits; studies delivering cherries, tomato juice, orange juice, and fennel reported reduction of anxiety symptom severity. Three experimental studies delivered interventions aimed at increasing intake of vegetable and/or fruit servings consumed by participants [46–48]. Two reported a decrease in anxiety symptoms. None of the human experimental studies involved participants with anxiety disorders.

Figure 12. Studies assessing vegetables and/or fruit and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
3.10.	Phytochemicals
A large number of studies have explored the effects of caffeine on anxiety symptoms (Figure 13). Many of these animal (n = 37) and human experimental (n = 33) studies administered caffeine as a supplement or provided energy drinks to subjects. While the animal studies reported a mixture of anxiogenic and anxiolytic effects, the observational and human experimental studies were more likely to report worsening anxiety symptoms with higher intake of caffeine. Several animal and human experimental studies assessed the impact of green tea and its constituents epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and l-theanine on anxiety levels. The studies reported primarily anti-anxiety effects; however, a meta-analysis of trials delivering L-theanine and EGCG failed to detect a significant benefit [49].
Anti-anxiety effects have been reported in animal studies assessing a wide range of plants and plant constituents that may be found in the North American diet with pri- marily anxiolytic findings reported. These included culinary herbs (rosemary, cinnamon, coriander, basil, and nigella), herbal teas (chamomile, hibiscus, and rose tea), the phytonu- trients curcumin (found in turmeric), quercetin (found in various vegetables and fruits), resveratrol (found in grapes), saffron and its constituents, soy and its constituents and other phytoestrogenic foods, nut and seed extracts, chocolate and cocoa and a variety of flavonoids, polyphenols, and carotenoids. Additionally, human experimental studies delivering green tea, curcumin, saffron, chamomile, and soy also reported anti-anxiety effects. Meta-analyses of experimental studies using chamomile [50], saffron [51], and curcumin [52,53] found a decrease in anxiety symptoms, while the meta-analysis of studies administering resveratrol reporting a non-significant improvement [54]. A small number of the human experimental studies involved participants with anxiety disorders including
 


three studies using chamomile [55–57], two using saffron [58,59], one using curcumin [60], and one using l-theanine [61]. All trials, with the exception of the l-theanine study [61], reported a reduction in anxiety symptoms severity.

Figure 13. Studies assessing phytochemicals and anxiety * Culinary Herbs: rosemary, cinnamon, coriander, basil, nigella; Herbal tea: chamomile, hibiscus, rose tea. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
3.11.	Food Allergy and Intolerance
A small body of evidence, primarily observational in nature, suggests a possible connection between food allergy or intolerance and anxiety symptoms (Figure 14). Eleven of thirteen studies found higher levels of anxiety symptoms in participants with celiac disease or a food allergy. Consumption of a gluten-free diet or avoidance of other food allergens was associated with improved anxiety symptoms in observational studies and two case reports. Seven experimental studies have assessed these diet interventions with three reporting benefit. Participants were predominantly irritable bowel syndrome sufferers; none included individuals with anxiety disorders.

Figure 14. Studies assessing food allergies or sensitivities and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
3.12.	Gut Microbiome
A number of studies have assessed the impact of probiotic and prebiotic supple- mentation in animals and humans (Figure 15). Animal trials have reported significant improvement in anxiety symptoms with supplementation of Lactobacillus strains, Bifidobac- terium strains, combinations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains, prebiotics, and synbiotics (combinations of prebiotics and probiotics). Interventions aimed at increasing
 


microbiome diversity or addition of fermented foods or fiber were associated with de- creased anxiety symptom severity. Administration of pathogenic organisms and antibiotics were associated with worsening anxiety symptom severity.

Figure 15. Studies assessing the microbiome and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with decreased anxiety. ■ No association between intake or levels and anxiety. ■ Higher intake or levels associated with increased anxiety.
Among the human studies, predominantly positive findings were reported by trials administering Bifidobacterium strains and multi-strain probiotics while trials administering Lactobacillus strains, combinations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains, and prebiotics reported either positive findings or no effect. Two trials involved participants with anxiety disorders [62,63]; one reported a benefit [63]. Three meta-analyses have pooled the trials assessing anxiety outcomes following probiotic supplementation [64–66]; one of three reported a significant improvement [65].
4.	Discussion
The results of this scoping review suggest a possible association between more or less anxiety and a range of dietary constituents and patterns. Table 1 presents a summary of the associations identified in this review.
Table 1. Summary of nutrients and diet patterns associated with more or less anxiety symptom severity or disorder prevalence.

Association with Less Anxiety	Association with More Anxiety
 
•	Vegetables and Fruit
•	Omega-3 Fatty Acids, Alpha-lipoic acid, Omega-9 Fatty acids
•	Nuts and seeds
•	“Healthy” Dietary Patterns, Mediterranean diet, Traditional Dietary Patterns, Anti-inflammatory diet pattern
 
•	Caloric Restriction
•	Fasting or intermittent fasting
•	Breakfast Consumption
•	Broad-Spectrum Micronutrients
•	Vegan Diet
•	Zinc, Magnesium, Selenium
•	Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Choline
•	Ketogenic Diet
•	Food sources of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium
•	Culinary herbs, Turmeric, Saffron, Soy, Green tea, Herbal tea, Quercetin, Resveratrol, other phytochemicals (flavonoids, polyphenols, carotenoids)
 
•	High-fat diet, high cholesterol, high trans fat
•	Inadequate tryptophan and dietary protein
•	High intake of sugar and refined carbohydrates, artificial sweeteners
•	“Unhealthy” Dietary Patterns, typically defined as high in unhealthy fats and refined sugars
•	Snacking
 

 
 


4.1.	Dietary Patterns
Overall, there is evidence that certain dietary patterns may influence the development and progression of anxiety disorders. The diets associated with lower anxiety include “healthy” diet patterns, the Mediterranean diet, traditional diets, the anti-inflammatory diet, and diets with increased variety. All of these diet patterns share common elements such as an emphasis on vegetables, fruit, limited sugar and refined grains, and greater consumption of minimally processed foods. However, interpretation of dietary patterns studies is somewhat hindered by the dissimilar definitions used for dietary patterns. For example, in the studies delivering “Western” style high fat/high sugar diets meant to induce obesity, a variety of dietary fats were used. The fats used to supplement some of the high fat diets included lard [67], fish oil [68], soybean oil [69] while other studies specified the percentage fat in the diet but not the type of fat that was added to achieve this amount [70–72]. Because the impact of different fatty acids on health outcomes can be highly different [73], categorizing diets as low or high in fat may result in heterogenous findings as a result of the type of fat delivered. Similarly, definitions of “healthy” diets have changed over time [74], potentially contributing to the heterogeneity of study results. Unfortunately, many studies lacked clear definitions of “healthy” or “unhealthy” diet patterns and interventions.
The outcomes associated with the vegetarian or vegan diet were generally positive although somewhat mixed and limited by being largely observational in design. The mixed findings may be due to a variety of factors. There is documentation of the adoption of a vegetarian or vegan diet following the development of an eating disorder [75]. Given the association between eating disorders and anxiety disorders [76], this may explain the association between vegetarianism and higher anxiety found in some observational studies. Furthermore, vegan diets, without adequate supplementation, may lack certain essential nutrients shown to play a role in anxiety disorders such as vitamin B12 [77] and long chain omega-3 fatty acids (EPA and DHA) [78]. Bioavailability of certain nutrients such as iron differ between plant and animal sources, possibly limiting nutrient absorption in vegan diets.
There is a significant lack of human intervention studies involving participants with anxiety disorders or elevated baseline anxiety symptoms. Many studies employed dietary patterns that were indicated for the other medical concerns of the study participants. For example, studies delivered the Low FODMAP diet to participants with irritable bowel syndrome and hypocaloric diets to participants with obesity and assessed changes in anxiety as secondary outcomes. The mechanisms by which dietary patterns impact anxiety symptoms may be the result of a combination of the mechanistic factors discussed in the following sections.
4.2.	Carbohydrates
The findings of the carbohydrate studies suggest that high intake of sugar and refined carbohydrates may contribute to anxiety symptoms; however, a large proportion of trials are cross-sectional in design, preventing conclusions about causation. There is a need for intervention studies that assess the impact of differing levels of carbohydrate intake in participants with anxiety disorders.
With respect to mechanism, there is evidence that healthy blood sugar regulation is an important factor in mental wellbeing [79]. This relationship may explain the associations seen in the present review between factors that improve blood sugar regulation and lower levels of anxiety symptoms. These include lower intake of sugar and refined carbohydrates, higher fiber intake, regular meals, and caloric restriction.
4.3.	Protein
The evidence related to the role of protein in anxiety symptoms is preliminary. There is some evidence suggesting that adequate dietary protein and, in particular, adequate tryptophan, may be important in improving anxiety symptoms. Amino acids serve as the
 


building blocks for neurotransmitter synthesis, with tryptophan needed for the production of serotonin [80]. The established role of serotonin in the pathogenesis of anxiety disor- ders [81] may explain the potential harm associated with inadequate dietary protein and tryptophan. This evidence is strengthened by the involvement of many participants with diagnosed anxiety disorders in the intervention studies included in the present review. The human experimental studies used doses of tryptophan ranging from 250 mg per day from a food source (squash seeds) to 3 g per day as a supplement. Although these doses are considered to be below the level associated with side-effects [82], the trial that adminis- tered 3 g per day reported side effects such as itching, nausea and urinary changes [83]. Tryptophan supplements should not be used in combination with serotonergic medications such as SSRI/SNRI due to the possible risk of precipitating serotonin syndrome [84]. Food sources of tryptophan include egg, soy, seeds, fish and meat [85].
4.4.	Fats
Overall, there is significant animal and human evidence that adequate or supplemental omega-3 fatty acids may have anti-anxiety effects. There is early evidence, predominantly from animal studies, that diets high in total fat, cholesterol, or trans fat may have an anxiogenic effect. With respect to a possible mechanism, there is evidence that inflamma- tion plays an important role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders [86], including anxiety [87], and that dietary fats can influence levels of inflammation [88]. Through their effects on enzyme pathways involved in the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines, omega-3 fatty acids contribute to lower levels of inflammation [89]. Conversely, omega-6 fatty acids increase levels of inflammation through increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Additionally, there is evidence that omega-3 fatty acids impact oxidative stress [90], neurotransmission [91], and neuroplasticity [92], which are known or hypoth- esized mechanisms for their use in the treatment of anxiety disorders [93,94]. Dietary omega-3 sources include fish and seafood, as well as flax seeds, chia and hemp seeds.
One somewhat inconsistent finding that has been observed in the present review is the impact of high fat diets. A large number of animal studies (39 of 63) reported a worsening of anxiety symptoms in response to intake of a high-fat diet. In contrast, the studies assessing the ketogenic diet, a diet that is very low in carbohydrates and generally high in fat content, suggest a possible therapeutic benefit. While these findings may be considered conflicting, it is speculated that the type of dietary fats used may have differed, with the high-fat diet delivered to the animals being composed of more omega-6, saturated and trans fatty acids. As such, the type of dietary fat, may be a significant factor in addition to the quantity of fat consumed.
4.5.	Vitamins and Minerals
There is significant animal data suggesting an anxiolytic effect of several vitamins and minerals as well as supplemental formulas which deliver a combination or broad range of micronutrients. Given the presence of micronutrients in whole, unprocessed foods such as vegetables, fruit, and whole grains, these findings add evidence to the importance of eating a healthy diet containing a variety of unprocessed foods. Intake of foods that provide a rich source of zinc (oysters, crustaceans, meat, organ meat, leafy and root vegetables [95]), and selenium (Brazil nuts, seafood, meat, beans, and lentils [85]) could be prioritized.
Micronutrients such as zinc and selenium are necessary as coenzymes in the synthesis and regulation of neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors [96] which may explain their importance in maintaining mental wellbeing. Additionally, B vitamins and folic acid contribute to the methylation balance which is hypothesized to be relevant to the pathophysiology of psychiatric illnesses [97].
4.6.	Vegetables, Fruits, and Phytochemicals
There is fairly consistent evidence that vegetables, fruit, and plant constituents may exert anti-anxiety actions; however, the majority of the evidence comes from animal studies.
 


Caffeine on its own or added to energy drinks appears to be associated with increased anxiety. Whole foods containing caffeine such as coffee, teas and cacao may have beneficial or equivocal impacts on anxiety, likely due to the co-occurrence of caffeine with other beneficial phytochemicals. Vegetables and fruit contribute to lower levels of inflammation and oxidative stress through their phytochemical and antioxidant constituents [98].
4.7.	Food Allergy and Intolerance
The body of evidence related to the connection between food allergies and anxiety symptoms is limited and the majority of the evidence pertains to the presence of elevated anxiety symptoms among individuals with celiac disease and the anti-anxiety effects of implementing a gluten-free diet in this population. The presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in celiac disease is established, with hypothesized mechanisms including mi- cronutrient deficiency due to malabsorption and hyperhomocysteinemia [99]; however, it is unclear how the findings of these studies may apply to anxious individuals unaffected by celiac disease.
4.8.	Gut Microbiome
Preliminary evidence suggests that the intake of beneficial microorganisms and prebi- otic fiber may be beneficial in the treatment of anxiety. Habitual diet strongly influences the composition of the gut microbiome, thus adding more rationale for the inclusion of fruits, vegetables, fiber, and fermented foods in the diet [100]. Potential mechanisms for the im- pact of the microbiome on psychiatric wellbeing include the modulation of the production of gut peptides involved in the gut-brain axis [101] and neurotransmitter synthesis [102].
4.9.	Strengths and Limitations
Strengths of the present review include an extremely rigorous search strategy intended to capture the full range of publications presenting data on this topic. A priori inclusion criteria and duplicate screening decreased the risk of bias. Completion of the project by an interdisciplinary team including clinicians and researchers contributed a range of perspectives and expertise.
The very large scope of this review was both a strength and limitation. Due to the very large volume of articles included in the review, in-depth analysis of individual articles was not possible. The results of the review may include over-simplification of the findings and a lack of attention to evaluating study quality, assessing study or publication bias, or providing contextual information (e.g., dose). In our data extraction and analysis we did not evaluate of the methods used for assessing participant anxiety symptoms or disorders, Anxiety symptoms can be assessed through a variety of methods including clinician- or self-administered questionnaires, or interviews which may utilize a range of diagnostic criteria. These different methods differ in their reliability as well as the exact nature of the symptoms or disorders that they assess. As a result, the studies included in this review report on relationships between food and a heterogeneous group of outcomes including the presence or absence of different anxiety disorders and a range of anxiety symptoms. The decision to include this heterogenous collection of research was an effort to capture a broad range of data related to this topic.
Another limitation of the present review is the unclear relevance of experimental studies which assessed the impact of high dose supplements of a dietary constituent. Doses of some of the nutrients delivered in trials as dietary supplement, such as zinc and omega-3 fatty acids, can be achieved through dietary modification; however, some of the nutrients, such as vitamin B6 (50 mg/day) were delivered in doses that cannot be achieved with food alone.
Another limitation was the exclusion of studies that failed to report changes in anxiety separately from other outcomes. Several studies that were not included in the present anal- ysis reported ‘psychological distress’ as a composite of anxiety and depression symptoms but did not report anxiety results alone [103,104]. These studies were excluded from the
 


present analysis as the purpose of this project was to identify research reporting anxiety outcomes specifically; however, it is noted that this resulted in the exclusion of a number of articles (n = 22).
The ability to draw conclusions from the data is also limited by a number of factors related to the methodology used in the included studies. This scoping review included a large number of animal studies which may have unclear applicability to humans. There are well established tests designed to measure changes in anxiety levels in animals through monitoring their behavior in a variety of experimental settings [105]; however, the ap- plicability of these results to the human experience of anxiety is inherently limited. The benefits of animal research include the ability to manipulate dietary factors in a highly controlled environment, the ability to observe effects rapidly as a result of the animals’ reduced lifespan and the ability to withhold potentially beneficial nutrients. There were also a large number of observational studies, mostly cross-sectional in nature. This type of study cannot draw conclusions about causality. The association between diet and mental health is known to be highly complex and bidirectional. While there is robust evidence that dietary patterns impact the likelihood of developing mental illness [14], there is also evidence that mental illness impacts eating behaviors [106]. This occurs through changes in motivation and appetite that can results from mental illness [107] and metabolic changes, increased appetite and cravings, and gastrointestinal distress [108] that can occur as a results of psychiatric medications [109]. Additionally, confounding factors such as eating disorders may be responsible for associations that are present. Given this bidirectional rela- tionship, the findings of cross-sectional studies have limited ability to answer the question of how food impacts anxiety. While a small number of prospective observational studies were identified in the present review, additional prospective studies are needed in order to accurately assess the impact of dietary patterns on the development of mental disorders, particularly the avoidance of potentially beneficial foods and increased intake of potentially harmful foods, which cannot be studied using an experimental design for ethical reasons.
Another important consideration when interpreting the study findings is the potential for difference between short- and long-term impacts of food on anxiety symptoms. As previously mentioned, it is known that the relationship between mental health symptoms and diet choices is bidirectional; emotional symptoms may drive eating behavior because of their immediate effects on the mitigation of emotional symptoms. The term “comfort eating” has been used to describe the phenomenon where individuals consume foods, especially those higher in calories, sugar, and fat, in response to negative affect [110]. Evidence from mechanistic studies suggest that corticosterone, a stress hormone, positively influences an animal’s intake of a sweet beverage [111] and that consumption of comfort food decreases mRNA production of hormones related to the stress response in animals [110]. It has been hypothesized that comfort eating is a behavior that decreases the stress-response during the experience of anxiety [110]. This phenomenon might explain some of the mixed finding of the present study. When considering the studies using “unhealthy”, “cafeteria”, or Western diets in animal models, 17 studies reported a decrease in anxiety symptoms and 21 reported an increase in anxiety symptoms. In contrast, of the 17 human observational studies assessing the relationship between unhealthy diet patterns and anxiety symptoms, 15 reported an association with more anxiety, and two reported no association. The mixed findings among the animal studies may be due to the duration of the experiment. Many of these studies assessed the impact of three to four weeks of the diet exposure on animal behavior and many of the studies reporting benefit assessed the impact of the diet on animals experiencing stress. The reported beneficial effects may be capturing the short-term stress-reducing effect of foods high in sugar and fat. In contrast, the human observational studies may have been capturing the effects of chronic consumption of unhealthy diets.
Another limitation that impacts the ability to draw clear conclusions from the present data is the enormous complexity of studying nutritional science. When considering the role of macronutrients (carbohydrates, protein, and fat), it is necessary to consider both the amount and type of the nutrient consumed. As highlighted previously, studies which
 


categorized dietary patterns as high or low in macronutrients such as fat or carbohydrates may not have considered the types of fat or carbohydrates being consumed. Given the highly different health impacts of complex and refined carbohydrates, significant atten- tion should be given to the studies differentiating these rather than those assessing total carbohydrates only.
Only a small number of intervention studies involved participants with anxiety dis- orders, many involved healthy participants or individuals with medical illnesses such as irritable bowel syndrome, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. This has several impli- cations. First, many of these studies were designed to assess cardiometabolic outcomes primarily and the studies may have not been adequately powered to detect changes in mental health symptoms. Secondly, the participants recruited to participate in these studies related to physical illness may have had low baseline levels of anxiety symptoms making it difficult to detect statistically significant changes in symptoms or becoming more suscepti- ble to other scale attenuation effects (e.g., floor and ceiling effects). Thirdly, the impact of a nutritional intervention on a healthy or non-anxious individual may not be relevant to understanding how the intervention might impact individuals with clinically significant anxiety disorders. There is a clear need for intervention studies enrolling participants with anxiety disorders or elevated anxiety symptoms. Similarly, studies designed with changes in mental health symptoms as the primary outcomes are needed.
5.	Conclusions
Although the results of this review reflect a field of study that is preliminary and emerging, the findings are consistent with established evidence about healthy eating pat- terns [112]. There is evidence of an association between healthy eating patterns and reduced anxiety symptoms. In the absence of a contraindication such as an allergy or specific med- ical condition, dietary interventions are considered low in risk, cost-effective [113], may confer secondary benefit to physical aspects of health and have at least some evidence suggesting a beneficial effect. However, the delivery of nutritional counselling as part of the treatment of anxiety disorders by primary care, psychiatry, dieticians, naturopaths, or other care providers is currently limited.
Prospective observational studies are needed to more clearly establish the causal role of diet factors in the development and progression of anxiety disorders. High quality intervention studies involving participants with anxiety disorders are warranted in order to evaluate the therapeutic potential of nutrition interventions in the management of anxiety disorders.

1.	Introduction
Depression is classified as one of the most common mental disorders [1]. Its prevalence has recently increased, becoming a growing public health threat [1–3]. In 2019, the incidence rate of mental disorders was one in eight people worldwide, a significant epidemiological and health proportion [4]. Furthermore, it is suggested that nearly half of the population (around 44%) will experience at least one episode of a mental disorder during their life- time [5]. Depression can be described as a complex and multicausal disease that involves a number of determinants, for example, biological, genetic, social, psychological, that are interrelated and interact with each other [6]. The prevalence of depressive disorders is also related to age (it most often starts in people between 20 and 40 years of age), gender (women fall twice as often as men), marital status (separated, divorced, widowed, especially for men), but also often to difficult traumatic experiences, for example, from childhood [7,8]. Other disease entities also contribute to the risk of depression, with particularly high prevalence rates associated with metabolic disorders (for example, cardiovascular disease) and autoim- mune disorders [9,10]. Currently, a growing number of researchers are seeking answers to the question of whether diet can be a modifiable factor in mental health [11,12]. There is some evidence to suggest that diet and related eating habits may be indirectly related to the risk of onset, severity, and duration of depression [12,13]. Diet and related eating habits have been identified as protective factors against psychiatric disorders, as there are similar biological mechanisms that link depression and cardiometabolic diseases. Based on these, a theory has been presented that a proper diet can improve mental health and prevent the occurrence of depression, as well as its effect on the risk of cardiovascular disease [14,15]. Potential relationships between nutritional deficiencies and mental health are suggested to have some relevance to overall society’s well-being on a global scale, although current evi- dence is severely limited. Considering their role in depression can provide additional clues to the mechanisms that affect this disease and potentially contribute to the development of
 


 
Nutrients 2023, 15, 2433. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15112433	https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 


primary and secondary prevention strategies. However, it should be noted that scientific evidence on this issue is currently severely limited [16]. There are several treatments for depression, such as pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, and non-pharmacological somatic treatments; however, as Blackburn writes, the treatment of depression has been suboptimal for 50 years [17–19]. Given the delayed onset of therapeutic effects and the desire to mini- mize side effects, particularly in cases of treatment-resistant depression, there is a growing interest in exploring strategies to accelerate the action of antidepressants [20]. Therefore, it is necessary to explore modifiable risk factors and effective prevention methods for depres- sion [20–22]. To our knowledge, reviews have recently been published on the use of dietary interventions for depression in adults [23,24]. In terms of studies assessing the relationship between nutrient intake and risk of depression, some results remain inconclusive, and a comprehensive synthesis of existing data in this area is currently lacking. Therefore, this review focuses on clarifying the role and importance of individual nutrients in the diet and the impact of nutrient deficiencies on the risk of depression.
2.	Methodology
The literature on the impact of nutrient deficiencies on depression was reviewed over the last five years (between 2018 and 2023). Internet databases (PubMed, Science Direct, Web of Science, Scopus, and Google Scholar) were searched according to keywords related to depression and nutrition, i.e., “nutritional deficiencies”, “depression”, “vitamin B”, “vitamin D”, “omega-3”, “adult depression”, etc. During the literature analysis, a total of 45 articles were identified that were dedicated to investigating the relationship between the intake of dietary nutrients and the appearance of depressive symptoms. The articles found were described in dedicated chapters and presented in tabular form, allowing the results presented to be compared and made more understandable. Furthermore, in addition to the aforementioned analysis of the scientific literature, a description of the relevance of nutrients for the functioning of the nervous system was made, and previous data indicating their potential impact on the risk of depressive symptoms were presented. Table 1 shows the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the studies in the review.
Table 1. Eligibility criteria.

Inclusion Criteria	Exclusion Criteria
 
-	Animal studies, reviews, case reports, editorials.
-	Studies assessing depression as a secondary disease to
 
-	Studies involving adults (people aged >18 years).
-	Observational studies (including cohort, longitudinal, and cross-sectional studies) and interventional studies (randomised controlled clinical trials).
-	Studies that focused on assessing dietary nutrient deficiencies.
-	The main focus was on major depressive disorder (MDD).
-	Papers were included regardless of the measurement methods used in the study (mainly self-reporting tools or medical diagnosis).
-	Articles published in English.
-	Studies published in the last five years (between 2018 and 2023).
 
another disorder and cancer.
-	Studies that assess depression in the context of nutrition after bariatric surgery.
-	Research only in paediatric and elderly populations and pregnant and/or breastfeeding women, as these are populations that would require a separate, stand-alone study on the topic described.
-	Studies that focused exclusively on evaluating the effectiveness of dietary interventions (for example, Western diet, Mediterranean diet, and others) or exclusively on nutrient supplementation.
-	Research that exclusively focusses on bipolar disorder.
-	Studies exclusively on depression and the gut–brain axis.
-	Articles published in a language other than English.
-	Studies published before 2018.
 

 

3.	Dietary Nutrient Deficiencies and Risk of Depression
Depression is a heterogeneous disorder that is associated with biological mecha- nisms such as inflammation, dysregulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, dysfunction of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system, and endothelial dysfunction [25]. Neurobiological investigations have revealed that depression is linked to
 


cortical and limbic neuronal atrophy, as well as disrupted connectivity and functioning of neural networks. These changes are the result of structural, functional, and neurochemical deficits, of which problems related to γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate func- tion are particularly relevant [26]. One of the most common hypotheses regarding the pathophysiology of depression suggests that there is also a link between depression and low levels of monoamine neurotransmitters. Reduced levels of serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine are observed in depressed individuals [27–29]. Synthesis and release of the aforementioned neurotransmitters depend on a number of factors, including changes in plasma composition, which are influenced by, among other things, the presence of nutrients in the diet. In addition, dietary modifications, such as changes in macronutrient, vitamin, and mineral intake, can affect cognitive function by regulating inflammatory processes and influencing molecular systems and cellular processes in the body [30,31]. Consequently, the role of optimising the supply of nutrients in the diet, which are essential for proper brain function and can support monoamine-based drug therapy, is increasingly emphasised in depressive disorders [32,33].
3.1.	Macronutrients and Water
There is a scarcity of research that examines the impact of insufficient macronutrient intake in the diet on the likelihood and manifestations of depression. In the context of evaluating the impact of diet on health, including mental health, it is worth considering not only individual macronutrients, but also their proportions and the general diet of an in- dividual [34]. The type and quantity of dietary protein consumed play an important role in the pathophysiology of depressive disorders, as protein serves as a crucial source of amino acids that serve as precursors to neurotransmitters within the brain. These are synthesised from aromatic amino acids, such as serotonin from tryptophan, and norepinephrine from tyrosine or its precursor phenylalanine. Therefore, a deficiency of these amino acids in the diet can result in reduced levels [35]. A study conducted by Kofler et al. showed a significant decrease in the concentrations of the aforementioned amino acids in the brain of individuals exhibiting depressive behaviour [36]. Studies on the impact of fat intake on the risk of depression most often analyse the quality of fat consumed, that is, the composition of fatty acids, and not just the amount of total fat consumed. A diet rich in saturated fatty acids (SFAs), trans fatty acids, may increase the risk of depression, while a diet rich in monounsat- urated fatty acids (MUFAs) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) may reduce the risk of depression, although research is inconclusive [37,38]. The brain uses carbohydrates as a major source of energy, as well as structural and functional components [39]. They can also affect mood and brain function by affecting levels of neurotransmitters such as serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine [25]. In addition, the availability of neurotransmitters such as glutamate, acetylcholine, and GABA is modulated by the exogenous glucose supply [40]. A diet based on carbohydrates with a lower glycaemic index can effectively reduce the risk of depression [41]. A significant effect of a high glycaemic load diet was also observed on the risk of depression [42]. It is also worth mentioning a very important part of the diet, fibre, and its potential impact on the prevention of depression [43]. Based on the findings of the present meta-analysis, each 5 g increase in total dietary fibre intake is associated with a 5% reduction in the risk of depression [44]. An inverse significant relationship was observed between the intake of fibre from vegetables and soluble fibre and the likelihood of depression. However, fibre from cereal products, fruit, and insoluble fibre were marginally associated with a reduction in depression. The relationship between dietary water intake and depression is not fully understood, and a cross-sectional study on this topic was found during the review period. Water accounts for 75% of brain mass, and dehydration can affect nervous system function [45]. According to Liska et al., anger, confusion, depression, and fatigue increase with dehydration at ≥1% [46]. The association of the intake of the described nutrients with depressive symptoms is described in Table 2.
 


Table 2.	Relationship between dietary macronutrients and water intake and the risk of depressive symptoms.

 
 
Year of Publication
 
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Proteins
 
Results and Conclusions


Total protein intake and protein intake from milk and
 
Li et al. [47]	2020
 
National cross-sectional
survey
 
n = 17,845 adults
 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and two 24 h dietary recall interviews
Depression, Anxiety, and
 
dairy products may reduce the risk of depressive symptoms in American adults, but not for protein intake from red meat, poultry, fish, cereals, and legumes.
Women were more likely to show symptoms of
 
Sheikhi et al. [48]
 
Cross-sectional study







Cross-sectional
 

n = 489 Iranian women



Amino acids
 
Stress Scales (DASS) questionnaire and
Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire




Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
 
depression in the highest tertile of animal protein intake. A diet high in animal protein may predispose to mental illness.


Women with depression consumed more energy and less tryptophan than women
 
Suga et al. [49]	2018
 
study	n = 7923 adults
 
(CES-D) and validated, self-administered diet history questionnaire
Hospital Anxiety and
 
without depression.
Tryptophan intake was inversely associated with depressive symptoms in young adult women.
Subjects in the study with the highest total branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) tercile
 
Koochakpoor et al. [50]







Reuter et al.
 
Cross-sectional study







Cross-sectional
 

n = 3175 adults
 
Depression Scale (HADS) and Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)




Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and
 
intake had a lower risk of depression.
There was also a significant inverse relationship observed between isoleucine intake and the likelihood of depression.
A diet rich in tryptophan has been shown to have a positive effect on mood. High
 
[51]	2021
 
study	n = 482 adults



Fats
 
participants were asked for their general consumption of TRP-rich foods



Beck Depression
 
amounts of tryptophan in the
diet appear to protect against depression and have a positive effect on social interactions.


No relationship was observed
 
Wilson et al. [52]




Currenti et al. [53]
 
Cross-sectional study




Cross-sectional study
 

n = 887 adults





n = 1572 adults
 
Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Dietary Instrument for Nutrition Education questionnaire (DINE)
Center for the Epidemiological Studies of Depression Short Form (CES-D and two Food Frequency Questionnaires (FFQs; a long and a short version)
 
between the amount of fat ingested in the diet and mental health.



No association was found between total fat intake and depressive symptoms.
 

 
 

 


Year of Publication


Sanchez-
 
Table 2. Cont.
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Carbohydrates
Follow-up questionnaire
 



Results and Conclusions


Greater exposure to added
 

Villegas et al. [54]



Ebrahimpour-
 
Prospective cohort study




Cross-sectional
 

n = 15,546 adults
 
and diagnosis of depression using a clinical interview for DSM-IV and
Semi-quantitative FFQ
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and
 
sugars and low-quality carbohydrates correlate with a higher risk of depression.


Depression was not
 
Koujan et al. [55]
 
2019
 
study	n = 3362 adults
 
General Health Questionnaire-12 and Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire

Patient Health
 
associated with adherence to a low-carbohydrate diet.


The higher the ratio of carbohydrate-to-fibre intake
 
Makhani et al. [56]
 
Cross-sectional study
 
n = 9728 adults
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and two 24 h dietary recall interviews
 
in the diet, the higher the risk of depressive symptoms, which can be moderate to severe in severity.
No significant association was
 
Amirinejad et al. [57]
 
Cross-sectional study
 
Depression Anxiety Stress n = 7384 adults	Scales and Validated Food
Frequency Questionnaire

Total macronutrients



Depression Anxiety Stress Scales 21 (DASS-21) and
 
observed between the dietary glycaemic index (DGI) and glycaemic load (DGL) and the likelihood of depression.


A significant interaction was found between the
high-protein and low-fat diets and the low-fat diet and the rs7041 polymorphism in
 
Pooyan et al. [58]
 
Cross-sectional study
 

n = 265 adults














n = 76,635
 
Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire and blood samples were taken, and biochemical measurements were taken











Patient Health
 
groups with moderate and severe depression.
In healthy adults without chronic diseases, a
high-protein, low-fat diet may interact with the VDBP genotype to reduce the risk of depression.
In both the United States and South Korea, people with low protein intake had a significantly higher risk of depression than those with normal protein intake.
When the proportion of kilocalories consumed from protein increased by 10%, the
 
Oh et al. [59]	2020	Cross-sectional
 
(60,935 from the United States and 15,700 from South Korea)
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and 24 h dietary recall interview
 
prevalence of depression was significantly reduced.
There was no significant association between fat intake and depression in either country. An association was observed between carbohydrate intake and the incidence of depression in the United States, but not in South Korea.
 

 
 

 


Year of Publication
 
Table 2. Cont.
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression



Patient Health
 



Results and Conclusions
For respondents of Hispanic origin, total protein intake and fats were negatively
 
Eissenstat et al. [60]







Lee et al. [61]	2021









Haghighatdoost et al. [62]
 
Cross-sectional study







Cross-sectional study








Cross-sectional study
 

n = 4747 adults







n = 6336 adults (3102 Korean adults and 3234 Americans)


Water



n = 3327 adults
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and two 24 h dietary recall interviews





Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and 24 h dietary recall interview




Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and water consumption was assessed by asking about the number of glasses of water that were consumed daily (<2, 2–5, and ≥5 glasses of water/day)
 
associated with depressive symptoms.
In Caucasians, the intake of dietary fibre was negatively associated with symptoms of depression.
A low intake of protein and dietary fibre as a result of food insecurity can increase the risk of depression.
Adequate diet and food security can play an important role in the prevention of depression.


A significant inverse relationship was shown between water consumption and depression.
Drinking <2 glasses of water per day was associated with a 73% increased risk of depression in men and 54% in women.
 

 

3.2.	Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
PUFAs are polyunsaturated fatty acids that the human body cannot synthesise on its own and are provided in the diet or by supplementation [63]. Furthermore, they show pleiotropic effects on neuronal structure and function, have anti-inflammatory effects, mod- ulate neuroendocrine pathways, and activate key neurotransmitters, which can contribute to the prevention of depression [64,65]. The bulk of the dry weight of the mature brain is made up of fatty acids, with PUFAs making up about 20% of the dry weight. Both omega-3 fatty acids, mainly docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and omega-6 fatty acids, mainly arachidonic acid (AA), can be found in the brain [66]. DHA acid plays a key role, as it is quantitatively the most important fatty acid and is essential for the proper functioning of the neuronal membrane [67]. Consumption of omega-3 PUFA at lower levels or lower serum levels of these acids are associated with a higher risk of suicide attempts and an episode of major depression [68]. Supplementation with omega-3 PUFA fatty acids has the potential to demonstrate favourable outcomes in the prevention and management of depressive disorders, although the findings across studies are not consistently conclusive [64,69]. Table 3 shows the scientific studies that evaluated the intake of PUFA in the diet and its effect on the risk of depression.

Table 3. Assessment of dietary fatty acid intake and prevalence of depressive symptoms.

 
 
Year of Publication
 
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Beck Depression
 
Results and Conclusions
Total omega-3 fatty acid intake
 
Sánchez- Villegas et al. [70]
 

2018
 
Cross-sectional	n = 6874 adults
 
Inventory-II and 143-item Semi-quantitative
Food-Frequency Questionnaire
 
(approximately 0.5–1 g/day) was significantly associated with a lower incidence of depression.
 

 
 

 


Year of Publication
 
Table 3. Cont.
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression



Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression scale
 



Results and Conclusions
A higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids was associated with increased connectivity within the neural networks associated with emotion and attention, and increased connectivity between the
 
Park et al. [71]	2020	Cohort study	n = 2200 adult women
 
(CES-D) assessment questionnaires, and n-3 FA intakes were assessed using a Semi-quantitative
Food-Frequency Questionnaire







PHQ-9 (nine-item Patient
 
regions of the brain associated with emotion control and cognitive processes. Omega-3 fatty acid intake may have an effect on brain function and possibly a role in the reduction of depressive symptoms in middle-aged women.
A higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids was associated with a lower risk of depressive symptoms, while a higher intake of omega-6
 
Zhang et al. [72]
 
Cross-sectional study
 
n = 17,431 adults
 
Health Questionnaire) and two 24 h dietary recall interviews




Center for Epidemiological
 
fatty acids was associated with a higher risk of depressive symptoms.
A higher omega-6:omega-3 ratio was also associated with a higher risk of depressive symptoms.
A higher intake of omega-3
 
Li et al. [73]	2020	Cross-sectional
 

n = 3054 adult women
 
Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) and Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)


Patient Health
 
fatty acids was associated with a lower risk of depression in early perimenopausal women.
Higher intakes of seafood and omega-3 fatty acids were associated with a lower risk
 
Berger et al. [74]







Chaves et al. [75]
 
Cross-sectional study







Longitudinal study
 
n = 206 adults








n = 13,879 adults
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and diet with a structured questionnaire





The Clinical Interview Schedule Revised (CIS-R) and Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)
 
of depressive symptoms. A protective factor against depression may be the
availability of fresh seafood in the local diet.
The protective effect of omega-3s (total and subtypes) has been shown, with reductions of 2–65% in the risk of major depressive disorder. Consumption of all types of omega-3 fatty acids was lower among those with persistent depressive episodes.
 

 

3.3.	Vitamins
3.3.1.	Vitamins of the B Group
Vitamin deficiency can be associated with symptoms of mental disorders [76]. Vi- tamins of the B group, in addition to the range of functions they perform in the human body, are essential for maintaining the normal functioning of the nervous system through the production of monoamine oxidase, DNA synthesis and methylation, and repair and maintenance of phospholipids [77]. In particular, deficiencies in B vitamins, i.e., B1, B6, B9, and B12, have been linked to depression, as they are essential for neuronal function [78–80]. They also have a protective effect against hypercysteinaemia, associated with an increased
 


risk of mood disorders [81]. Furthermore, low levels of vitamin B9 and B12 have been associated with a poorer response to antidepressants [82]. Current work by Berkins et al. suggests that dietary intake of vitamin B6 and B12 may have an impact on brain structure. Vegetarians, particularly those who experience depression, can derive benefits from sup- plementing their diet with vitamins B6, B9, and B12 to promote optimal brain health [83]. The effects of the listed B vitamins on the nervous system and the risk of depression are described in Table 4.
Table 4. Main role of selected B vitamins in the nervous system.

Vitamin B	Effects on the Nervous System and Risk of Depression
 
Thiamine is an important coenzyme during the synthesis of neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine and serotonin, for example.
The most important function of thiamine is considered to be that it makes a
 
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)






Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)





Vitamin B9 (folic acid)







Vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
 
major contribution to cellular energy metabolism and, as an essential cofactor in carbohydrate metabolism, it helps to supply energy to nerve cells [84].
An inverse relationship has been shown between thiamine levels and depressive symptoms in adults [85].
Pyridoxine functions as a cofactor in the pathways involved in myelin synthesis and enzymatic reactions, including the synthesis of neurotransmitters such as gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin, and dopamine [86].
Furthermore, it controls glutamate excitability and neuronal metabolism. Vitamin B6 and magnesium both modulate neurobiological mechanisms, leading to speculation that they may exert synergistic effects [87].
Pyridoxal-5-phosphate concentrations, the active form of vitamin B6, were measured in Hispanic adults in years 2 and 5 of the study, and it was observed that depressive symptoms were higher in those with low values [88].
Folic acid is involved in the synthesis and metabolism of neurotransmitters associated with depression (serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine). In addition, it plays a vital role in the regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a cofactor essential for the formation of neurotransmitters [89].
An association has been shown between lower serum folic acid levels during pregnancy and prenatal depression [90].
A specific function of vitamin B12 is to participate in the DNA synthesis of myelin-producing oligodendrocytes and in the synthesis of myelin [83,85]. Cobalamin is a cofactor of the methionine synthase enzyme, which catalyses the reaction to transfer a methyl group to a homocysteine molecule. Methionine is formed, which is the precursor of
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). SAM plays an important role in the methylation processes necessary for the normal synthesis and/or metabolism of membrane phospholipids, DNA, RNA, neurotransmitters and for the normal function of the myelin sheaths of nerve fibres [91].
Vitamin B12 deficiency may be associated with impaired glutathione peroxidase activity elevated levels of free radicals. Furthermore, the prevalence of depression tends to be higher among vegetarians due to insufficient intake of vitamin B12 [92].
 

 

Table 5 shows the current literature on the assessment of the dietary intake of B vitamins in the diet and their impact on the risk of depression. Low levels of the vitamins described can be due to a number of reasons, i.e., comorbidities, for example, multiple sclerosis, in which, according to a paper by Orti et al., patients who consumed less thiamine showed higher levels of depression characteristic of multiple sclerosis [93], old age [94], use of plant-based diets [95], their malabsorption [96], or unbalanced diet, so given the purpose of this review and the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the focus was mainly on dietary deficiencies in adults.
 


Table 5. Assessment of dietary intake of B vitamins and prevalence of depressive symptoms.

 
 
Year of Publication
 
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression and
Vitamin B1
 
Results and Conclusions
 
Duc et al. [97]	2021






Nguyen et al. [98]







Kafeshani et al. [99]
 


National cross-sectional
survey





National cross-sectional
survey






Cross-sectional study
 



n = 34,700 adults







n = 16,371 adults



Vitamin B6


n = 3362 adults
 

Depression was defined as physician diagnosis, the current presence or treatment for depression and 24 h dietary recall interview and a
Semi-quantitative Questionnaire on Food Frequency

Depression was defined based on the diagnosis of the physician or the current presence or treatment of depression, and daily food intake was calculated using the 24 h recall method and a
Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)



Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
and a validated, 106-item Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)


Hospital Anxiety and Depression
 
Serum vitamin B1 concentrations were assessed and related to dietary intake. Low serum thiamine concentrations were associated with a high incidence of depressive symptoms.
Increased daily vitamin B1 intake was negatively associated with the appearance of depression.


A higher dietary intake of vitamin B1, B3, or A reduces the risk of depression in a nationally representative
Korean cohort.




The average intake of vitamin B6 (mg/day) was lower in people with depression.
A lower intake of vitamin B6 in the general population and among women was associated with a higher likelihood of depression.
Symptoms of moderate-to-severe depression were associated with a
 
Odai et al. [100]	2020	Cross-sectional
 
n = 289 adult women
 
Scale (HADS)
and self-administered diet history questionnaire (BDHQ)
 
lower dietary intake of vitamin B6. Symptoms of depression may be reduced by increasing your intake of vitamin B6.
 
Vitamins B9 and B12
The major depressive disorder(s) of the participants was diagnosed by
 



In addition to dietary nutrient intake,
 

Khosravi et al. [101]
 

Clinical-control study
 
n = 260 women (87 depressed and
173 healthy) and 70 men
(22 depressed and
48 healthy)
 
psychiatrists using the criteria of DSM-IV and for the control group Beck Depression Inventory questionnaire (BDI-II), and the dietary intake in the last
12 months was evaluated using a Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ).
 
their serum concentrations were evaluated and related to each other. An unhealthy diet was associated with a higher risk of depression through a reduction in the serum levels of vitamins B9 and B12.


Synthetic folic acid was not associated
 
Zheng et al. [102]	2020	Cross-sectional



A
 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 n = 19,244 adults	(PHQ-9) and 24 h dietary recall
interview

Iranian validated version of depression, anxiety, and
 
with depressive symptoms, but total and natural folate intakes were inversely associated with depressive symptoms.
Low intakes of B vitamins, including folic acid, vitamin B6, and vitamin
 
Mahdavifar et al. [103]
 
2021
 
population-based prospective cohort study
 
n = 7387 Iranian adults
 
stress scale questionnaire 21 (DASS 21) and Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (DS-FFQ)
 
B12, were associated with higher
depressive symptoms.
Higher biotin intake was significantly associated with lower incidence of depressive symptoms.
 

 

3.3.2.	Vitamin D
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that is obtained during exposure to sunlight, food, and supplementation. An increasing number of studies confirm its role in the patho- physiology of diseases, including mental illness [104,105]. According to Fipps et al., the risk of depression increases by 8–14% in people with vitamin D deficiency [106]. Several mechanisms can be invoked to account for this phenomenon. One is the presence of vi- tamin D receptors (VDR) in different parts of the cortex and limbic system [107]. Many of these areas of the brain have been associated with the pathophysiology of depression, and VDRs are also found in the hippocampus, which plays a role in the control of memory and emotional function [108]. Furthermore, vitamin D is a potent regulator of the pro- duction of neurotrophic substances, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin (NT)-3, and nerve growth factor (NGF). Subsequently, vitamin D plays an im-
 


portant modulatory role in regulating immunoinflammatory pathways that are important in the pathophysiology of depression, and lower serum vitamin D levels have been shown in depressed patients compared to controls [109–111]. Another hypothesis is the high levels of reactive oxygen species and Ca2+ in nerve cells in individuals deficient in vitamin D [112]. In addition, vitamin D is effective in preventing depression by maintaining serotonin levels at optimal levels and regulating dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the brain [113,114]. Vitamin D deficiency in patients with depression, as well as in the healthy population, is an important health problem. Research focusses mainly on laboratory measurements of serum vitamin D-25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) levels [115]. The role of vitamin D in preventing the onset of postnatal depression is particularly highlighted [116]. An interesting area of research in the context of vitamin D and depression is the determination of levels of the vitamin D-binding protein gene. Calcitriol (1,25[OH]2D3) exerts its influ- ence on the quantity and structure of the neurone by means of detoxification pathways, which encompass the inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase and the elevation of glutathione levels, together with the regulation of neurotrophin synthesis—all of which represent determinants associated with the development of depressive symptoms [117]. The potential influence of calcitriol on depressive symptoms can be attributed to the exis- tence of the vitamin D receptor, the vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP), and/or the enzyme 1-alpha-hydroxylase, responsible for the conversion of 25(OH)D3 to 1,25(OH)2D3 within the central nervous system [117]. Table 6 shows the results of the studies on dietary intake and serum vitamin D levels and their impact on the risk of depressive symptoms.
Table 6. Assessment of dietary intake and serum vitamin D levels and prevalence of depressive symptoms.

 
 
Year of Publication
 
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Vitamin D
 
Results and Conclusions
 

Pooyan et al. [58]







Jahrami et al. [118]
 

Cross-sectional study







Clinical-control study
 


n = 265 adults






n = 192 participants: 96 patients with depression and
96 age- and
sex-matched controls
 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales 21 (DASS-21) and Semi-quantitative
Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)



Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) (covering 102 foods distributed on
38 items/groups)
 
In healthy adults without chronic disease, a high-protein/low-fat diet may interact with the genotype of vitamin D-binding protein VDBP to reduce the risk of depression.
Depressed patients have significantly lower serum vitamin D levels.
Depressed patients appeared to have statistically significantly less vitamin D from sunlight sources, even though dietary vitamin D intake was the same in both groups. Approximately 80% of depressed patients and 70% of controls have been shown not to take adequate daily doses of vitamin D.
 

 

3.4.	Mineral Components
To date, scientific investigations have focused mainly on elucidating the involvement of minerals, assessing dietary and blood serum deficiencies, in the pathogenesis of depres- sion [119,120]. Several of these, such as magnesium, zinc, iron, copper, and selenium, have been identified as key in the regulation of cell function and neuromodulation, as well as antioxidant activity [119,121]. Studies have shown that insufficient magnesium levels can induce alterations in central nervous system functioning, specifically affecting glutamater- gic transmission within the limbic system and the cerebral cortex. These regions of the brain are critical in the pathophysiology of depression cause [122]. According to Pickering et al., magnesium deficiency can affect the secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone, which, in turn, leads to increased levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This mechanism may be related to depression by affecting the regulation of the hypothalamic–
 


pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis [123]. Magnesium is also an antagonist of NMDA receptors (N-methyl-d-aspartate), and its deficiency can lead to its functional overactivity [124]. The NMDA receptor is associated with the flow of calcium ions into nerve cells, which is crucial for their proper functioning. Its excessive activation can lead to increased calcium ion flow, which, in turn, leads to neurotoxicity. The relationship between dietary magnesium intake and serum magnesium levels and the risk of depression is currently inconclusive. It should be noted that serum magnesium represents only ~1% of total magnesium in the body and does not fully reflect intracellular magnesium status.
Research suggests that changes in brain zinc levels are associated with the develop- ment of depression and that zinc supplementation may help treat the condition. Zinc supplementation has been shown to support the effects of antidepressants and improve de- pressive symptoms in some patients [125]. Another possible reason for the antidepressant effect of zinc could be its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [126]. Furthermore, zinc is also an NMDA receptor antagonist [127]. In addition, zinc influences hormonal regulation, including cortisol levels, cellular immune response, neurogenesis, neuronal plasticity, and expression of BDNF in the hippocampus and cortex, and zinc ions regulate synaptic transmission or act as neurotransmitters [128]. Recent scientific investigations have emphasised the importance of zinc transporters (ZincTs) and zinc-sensing GPR39 receptors in the aetiology and therapeutic interventions related to depression [129]. Current evidence from observational studies and RCTs supports the potential benefits of zinc in reducing risk and alleviating depression [130].
According to Chadern, selenium intake is the most associated with depression of all di- etary factors considered [131]. Selenium is an essential trace element that is required for the proper functioning of several selenoproteins, including those involved in the defence of an- tioxidants in the brain and nervous system. In addition, it helps protect cells from oxidative damage, which can lead to inflammation and disease, including neurological diseases [132]. Given its neuromodulatory role in brain function, researchers are increasingly testing the link between selenium and depression, but some of the results are contradictory [133].
In a recently published study by Hongrong et al., the prevalence of depressive symptoms was significantly higher in patients with elevated serum copper levels. Among serum levels of copper, selenium, and zinc, only an association was observed between depressive symp- toms and copper levels [134]. These findings are supported by a meta-analysis by Ni et al. suggesting that elevated blood copper levels may be associated with depressive disorders and, therefore, a possible role for copper as a biomarker of depression [135]. Although it can be speculated that the imbalance of copper in the human body may be one of the causes of depression, there are processes in which copper plays an important role in the development and function of the nervous system. These include neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, neuro- transmission, cognition, learning and memory processes, and NMDA function [136]. Copper can support the activity of two neurotrophic factors: BDNF and nerve growth factor (NGF). These neurotrophic factors can influence neuronal plasticity and the neural network [137,138]. Taking a monoaminergic approach to depression, the role of copper in the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine should also be mentioned. The conversion of dopamine to nore- pinephrine is copper-dependent, as copper ions interact with dopamine β-hydroxylase [139]. Copper deficiency and excess copper can affect brain function. Astrocytes are considered important regulators of the homeostasis of this element [140].
Iron deficiency represents a prevalent nutritional problem on a global scale and can cause iron deficiency anemia, which is one of the most frequently encountered forms of anemia. In particular, there has been a growing focus on investigating iron metabolism and its pivotal role in the context of mental disorders [141]. Norepinephrine has been linked to iron metabolism in the brain, which can affect the neuroplasticity and function of prefrontal neurones and the hippocampus. Furthermore, BDNF levels are regulated by iron, which is necessary for normal synthesis of neurotransmitters and also for the aromatic hydroxylase enzymes present in neurones. For this reason, the neurobioavailability of iron and the ability of the brain to capture iron from the blood are important for maintaining
 


adequate levels of BDNF and neurotransmitters involved in emotional processes, including depression [142]. The hypothesis that dysfunctions in the glutamatergic system may be associated with the appearance of depression is currently under intensive investigation and is not yet fully confirmed. However, there is evidence that iron deficiency can affect changes in the glutamatergic system and lead to mood disorders. Iron plays an important role as an enzyme cofactor in metabolic reactions that lead to the production and release of the neurotransmitter glutamate [143]. A recent review by Wassef et al. found that anemia and/or iron deficiency may contribute to postpartum depression in women at risk [144]. Richardson et al. showed that higher body iron levels in young adult males may be associated with more depressive symptoms [145].
The role of calcium in the pathophysiology of depression can be explained by its involvement in several mechanisms. One of these is the involvement in the regulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) system. Furthermore, extracellular calcium influx is an important component of many neuronal processes. Changes in extracellular Ca2+ concentration may be involved in emotion regulation, which may be a direct effect of Ca on stabilisation of the plasma membrane, and NMDA may also affect neuronal plasticity [146]. Table 7 shows, based on the current literature, studies that determined dietary elemental intake and self-reported depression.

Table 7. Assessment of dietary mineral intake and prevalence of depressive symptoms.

 
 
Year of Publication
 
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Magnesium
 
Results and Conclusions
 


Anjom-Shoae et al. [147]
 


Cross-sectional	n = 3172 adults





n = 17,730 adults from the
 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and dish-based 106-item Semi-quantitative FFQ (DS-FFQ)



Patient Health
 
Among normal-weight men and overweight women, a significant inverse association was found between magnesium intake and depression.
Lower magnesium intake was associated with a higher risk of depression, particularly in
 
Sun et al. [148]	2019	Cross-sectional
 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
 
Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and two 24 h dietary recall interviews







5-Item Brief Symptom Rating Scale (BSRS-5) and
 
the female group.
In all age groups, the inverse association between dietary magnesium intake and risk of depression was statistically significant.
Serum magnesium concentration was inversely correlated with the occurrence of depressive symptoms, which was not shown for the dietary
 
Chou et al. [149]
 
Cross-sectional study
 

n = 4615 adults
 
Serum Magnesium (mg/dL) and dietary magnesium intake (mg)—24 h dietary recall questionnaire
 
magnesium intake.
Serum magnesium was poorly correlated with dietary magnesium. The level of serum magnesium was negatively associated with depressive symptoms in the sample, in the men, but not in the women.
 

 
 

 


Year of Publication
 
Table 7. Cont.
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Zinc

The Beck Depression
 



Results and Conclusions


In Iranian female students, an inverse association was
 

Hajianfar et al. [150]
 

Cross-sectional	n = 142 female students
 
Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)




Patient Health
 
observed between dietary zinc intake and mood disorders, including depression, and some indicators of sleep disturbance.
Especially in the female population, low dietary intakes of zinc and vitamin A
 
Hu et al. [151]	2022	Cross-sectional
 
n = 31,839 adults




Selenium


n = 7725 adult
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9 and two 24 h dietary recall interviews







Patient Health
 
were significantly associated with depression. In the low zinc intake group, the risk of depression was significantly reduced with increased total vitamin A intake.


An inverse relationship was observed between participants’ dietary selenium
 
Ghimire et al. [152]






Ferreira de Almeida et al. [153]







Nakamura
 
Cross-sectional study






Cross-sectional study







Cross-sectional
 
participants in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)





n = 736 adult farmers



Copper
 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and 24 h dietary recall interview




Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview and three 24 h dietary recall interviews



Kessler’s six-item psychological distress scale (K6) and the FFQ include 87
 
intake and depressive symptoms.
There was no association between serum selenium levels and depressive symptoms.
A high intake of selenium is associated with a lower incidence of depression, even after taking into account sociodemographic variables, lifestyle factors, and pesticide poisoning.


Low intakes of zinc, copper, and manganese were associated with depressive
 
et al. [154]	2019











Li et al. [155]	2018
 
study	n = 2089 adults



Iron





Cross-sectional	n = 14,834 adults
 
food items and ask about the usual consumption rates and portion sizes during the previous month.








Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and 24 h dietary recall
 
symptoms.
For calcium, magnesium, and iron, the inverse relationship was not statistically significant.


Participants with depression had significantly lower total daily zinc, iron, copper, selenium, and energy intakes than those without depression. Higher zinc, iron, copper, and selenium intake was negatively associated with depression, and negative associations with copper and selenium intake remained statistically significant after considering potential confounders.
 

 
 

 


Year of Publication
 
Table 7. Cont.
Type of Study	The Group	Assessment of Depression
Calcium
 


Results and Conclusions


Even after adjusting for a large number of potential confounders, calcium intake
 
Shen et al. [156]
 
Cross-sectional study
 
Patient Health
n = 14,971 adults	Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and
24 h dietary recall



Various Minerals
 
was negatively associated with the risk of depressive symptoms. The incidence of depressive symptoms decreased as calcium intake increased.
 


Sánchez- Villegas et al. [157]





Salehi-
 



2018	Cohort study	n = 13,983 students







Cross-sectional
 
136-item validated Semi-quantitative Food
Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) and structured clinical interview for DSM-IV (SCID-I)



Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
 
A deficiency of 4 nutrients at baseline increased the risk of depression (folic acid, magnesium, calcium, and potassium) in this longitudinal study of a middle-aged population.
It has been shown that higher intakes of B12, zinc, phosphorus, saturated fats, cholesterol, B5, and B6 are
 
Abargouei et al. [158]
 
2019
 
study	n = 3846 adults
 
and Semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)



Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)
 
associated with a reduced risk of major depression in men and a reduced risk of psychological distress in women.
Sugar, sodium, vitamin A, water, fat, saturated fatty acids, omega-6 fatty acids,
 
Yun et al. [159]	2021	Cross-sectional
 
n = 10,106 adults
 
and nutrient intake and dietary habit information of the K-NHANES were used as independent variables.









Clinical Interview Schedule
 
dietary fibre, and frequency of breakfast, lunch, dinner, and eating out were significantly associated with depression.
A significant inverse relationship was found between depression and a higher intake of selenium, zinc, vitamins B6 and B12 in the sample.
Among women, a similar pattern of correlation was
 
Ferriani et al. [160]
 
Longitudinal study
 

n = 14,737 adults
 
Revised (CIS-R) and Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)
 
observed, in addition to higher intakes of vitamins A and C.
Among men, a significant inverse relationship between depression was only observed with vitamin B12 and B6 intake. The incidence and severity of depression may be reduced by increasing intake of selected micronutrients.
 

 

4.	Limitations
The article delineates the role and significance of nutritional components in the diet within the context of their impact on the nervous system and depressive symptoms. Fur- thermore, it presents research pertaining to the relationship between the consumption of nutritional components in the diet and their influence on depression. Nevertheless, it has some limitations. One is that it is mainly based on cross-sectional studies, which make it
 


impossible to determine causal conclusions and need to be supplemented and confirmed by longitudinal clinical-control studies. However, it should be noted that observational studies are also a valuable source of information, contributing to the evaluation of the available scientific evidence. The studies included in this review were primarily based on observation of large groups of subjects, allowing more representative and general data. Furthermore, the diagnosis of depression was mainly based on self-report questionnaires, which assess depressive symptoms, but should not be considered equivalent to a clinical diagnosis of depression and therefore would need to be completed according to the DSM criteria. Another limitation is the evaluation of dietary nutrient intake, which was mostly done on the basis of food frequency questionnaires or 24 h interviews, which poses the risk of under or overestimation of data, although in most studies participants were carefully instructed on how to complete the questionnaire or dietary interview (for example, it was conducted twice, one in the presence of the research team person and the other a few days after, by telephone). However, it should be stressed that there is no perfect tool for assessing food intake and that, in most low-cost and simple methods, some limitations are inevitable. Furthermore, when nutrients are consumed together rather than separately, they can influence each other through their interactive or synergistic effects. Therefore, the study of dietary patterns is a second interesting area of research in addition to assessing the impact of individual nutrients.
5.	Strengths and Future Research Directions
Given the current state of knowledge and the often contradictory results of studies dedicated to the impact of nutrition on mental health, this review seems to be a needed addition to this information. The number of articles included in this review can be seen as a strength. It is not easy to discuss the effectiveness of introducing nutritional interventions among people with a risk of developing or current psychiatric disorders. It can certainly be argued that the presented data show that nutrition should not be considered as the only means of preventing depression or replacing pharmacology. Additionally, dietary modi- fications appear to be an underused tool for improving mental health. The development of psychological nutrition faces many obstacles, including the difficulty of maintaining a healthy, varied diet, given the popularity of the Western diet and the difficulty of adhering to dietary recommendations among patients with depression.
This review also aims to spread awareness of nutrition and its impact on mental health and highlight it for further research. Risk groups such as pregnant women, in whom the need for many nutrients increases and the supply of these nutrients from the diet is insufficient, are also very important [161]. The nutrients ingested by pregnant women are essential to facilitate normal growth and development of the foetus, particularly with respect to the maturation of the nervous system [162]. It is recommended that more work should be done to create clear dietary recommendations for the risk and prevalence of mental health problems. This aspect should also be taken into account in supplementation programmes. It is also worth noting that behavioural factors such as physical inactivity, excessive alcohol consumption and smoking, and sleep deprivation can influence poor eating habits and lead to nutrient deficiencies [163]. For example, people with sleep disorders often have a greater tendency to eat highly processed and nutritionally poor foods, which can lead to nutritional deficiencies [163,164]. In addition, overweight and obesity, often as a consequence of unhealthy lifestyles, are linked to depressive disorders [165]. Alcohol and tobacco can also affect nutrient absorption and metabolism, contributing to deficiencies. These deficiencies can further affect neurochemical balance and brain function, contributing to the development or exacerbation of depressive symptoms [166]. It is worth considering these factors in future research into the role of nutrition in depression and to approach healthy lifestyles in a holistic way, taking into account the various aspects that support mental health [167–170]. Research that considers these aspects may provide a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms through which these factors influence the development and course of depression. This information may be valuable
 


for the development of more effective dietary strategies and interventions to alleviate the symptoms of depression by optimising nutrients and changing unhealthy lifestyle behaviours.
6.	Conclusions
Deficiencies in nutrients such as protein, B vitamins, vitamin D, magnesium, zinc, selenium, iron, calcium, and omega-3 fatty acids have a significant impact on the function of the brain and nervous system, which can affect the appearance of depressive symptoms. On the other hand, an excess of certain nutrients in the diet can also have a negative impact on mental health (copper, iron). To prevent deficiencies of the listed nutrients in the diet, it is worth noting the importance of a varied and balanced diet, while also taking into account the potential risks associated with the absorption and bioavailability of certain components through the presence of other components in the diet [171]. In summary, based on the available scientific evidence, a diet that supports mental health should consist mainly of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, sources of vegetable protein, legumes, nuts, fish, low-fat dairy products, while limiting the intake of simple sugars and highly processed foods [172]. The indicated food sources contain vitamins, minerals, tryptophan, fibre, antioxidants, and good quality fats, which can benefit mental health by reducing oxidative stress, inflammation and providing essential nutrients for the brain. However, it is important to remember that diet in itself is not the only factor influencing the risk of or helping to treat depression. There are many other aspects, such as physical activity, sleep, stress management, and social support, that also play an important role in maintaining mental health. It is worth approaching a healthy lifestyle in a comprehensive way, taking into account different aspects to support mental health. Further studies, including prospective cohort, case-control studies, are recommended to draw more reliable conclusions. Table 8 summarizes the effects of the nutrients described on the risk of depressive symptoms.
Table 8. Summary of the effects of the described nutrients on the risk of depression.

Nutrient	Conclusions
 
Higher total protein consumption as well as that specifically derived from milk and dairy products might potentially lower the susceptibility to depressive symptoms. No benefit has been shown for protein intake from animal sources [47,48]. A beneficial effect of a higher
 
Proteins
 
supply of tryptophan in the diet has been shown to decrease the risk of depression [49–51]. A diet with an increased supply of protein relative to other macronutrients may have a beneficial effect on the risk of depression in adults who do not have any chronic
diseases [58–61].
 

 
No association has been observed between total fat consumption and the manifestation of depressive symptoms [52,53,59], although not all results are conclusive [58,60].
Greater exposure to added sugars, low-quality carbohydrates, and low dietary fibre intake
 
Carbohydrates


Water

Polyunsaturated fatty acids

Vitamins of the B group


Vitamin D

Mineral Components
 
have been shown to correlate with a higher risk of depression [54,57]. No significant association was observed between the dietary glycaemic index and the dietary glycaemic load and the likelihood of depression [57].
To date, it has not been conclusively demonstrated that dietary water intake directly affects the risk of depression; however, dehydration can exacerbate, for example, fatigue and depression. Therefore, it is worth ensuring that the body is adequately hydrated to avoid the negative effects of dehydration [46,62].
All the publications cited showed a beneficial effect of increased omega-3 fatty acid intake to prevent the onset of depressive symptoms in different groups [70–75].
Low dietary and/or serum levels of vitamins B1, B6, B9, and B12 have been associated with a higher prevalence of depressive symptoms [97–103]. The findings suggest that the intake of adequate amounts of B vitamins may have a positive impact on mental health and reduce the risk of depressive symptoms.
Depressed patients have significantly lower serum vitamin D levels [58,118]. It has been shown that approximately 80% of depressed patients do not take adequate daily doses of vitamin D [118].
Dietary deficiencies in magnesium, zinc, selenium, copper, and manganese have been associated with a greater likelihood of depression [147–160]. Both excess and deficiency of copper and iron may affect the risk of depression [135,145,154,155].
 

Introduction

There have been many suggestions that aspects of both macro- and micro-nutrient intake influence mood. As space precludes a systematic examination of the entire area several of the more important are introduced.

Macro-nutrient intake and depression

Wurtman and Wurtman1 developed the hypothesis that carbohydrates can relieve depression, a suggestion that depended on three disorders; carbohydrate craving obesity, the pre-menstrual syndrome and seasonal affective disorders. They proposed that an increase in carbohydrate intake reflected an attempt at self- medication, that carbohydrate intake enhanced sero- tonin synthesis.
The Wurtmans’ suggested that in normal individuals an increase in brain serotonin changes our food pre- ferences, we no longer like carbohydrate to the same

Corresponding author: Email: d.benton@swansea.ac.uk
 
extent and eat other macro-nutrients. They proposed that some obese people suffer from a disturbance of this feedback mechanism such that after eating carbohydrate the mechanism that should stop further carbohydrate intake fails to work. When those suffering with carbohydrate craving obesity were offered snacks that differed in macro-nutrient composition, towards the late afternoon, they snacked almost entirely on high carbohydrate foods, although they did not eat more at meal times1. When asked why they snacked the response was more likely to be that it made them feel more calm or clearheaded, rather than to satisfy hunger. Those who were carbohydrate cravers felt less depressed and more alert. Those who did not crave carbohydrate felt sleepy and fatigued.
Those suffering with Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) typically eat more in the winter and put on weight. From the Wurtmans’ perspective this is an attempt to decrease depressive symptoms by eating carbohydrate rich foods. The eating of a carbohydrate- rich/protein-poor meal was associated with improved mood in those suffering with SAD2.
The prediction that a high carbohydrate intake influences only those who are depressed has been questioned. De Castro3 asked normal subjects to keep dietary diaries from which he calculated the proportion of calories that came in the form of carbohydrates. Over a nine-day period he found that a higher intake of carbohydrate was associated with feeling less

1999 Nutrition Society
 

 
depressed and more energetic. A higher intake of protein was also associated with feeling more depressed. An interesting aspect of these data is that the associ- ations were not apparent when particular meals were related to mood around the time of eating. Similarly a positive relationship was reported between the amount of carbohydrate consumed, over a seven-day period, and positive mood in a group of control subjects, although not in bulimic patients4.
The correlational nature of these studies makes the data difficult to interpret. It is unclear whether carbohydrate leads to a better mood or whether those who are depressed eat more carbohydrate. However, when subjects ate diets that contained either low, medium or high levels of carbohydrate for one week, the consumption of the low carbohydrate diet was associated with increased anger, depression and tension5. The consumption of a low carbohydrate/ high protein breakfast for three weeks resulted in reports of increased anger6. A further study, however, found no difference when high and low carbohydrate diets were compared over three days7.
The relative consistency of the finding that the con- sumption of a diet high in carbohydrate is associated with better mood suggests that it is a robust phenom- enon. Such findings do, however, conflict with the view that the phenomenon should only be observed in depressed individuals and that mood should be altered in the hours following eating1.

The Wurtman hypothesis

The most quoted hypothesis1 concerning diet and mood is that a high carbohydrate meal increases the ratio in the plasma of tryptophan to ‘large neutral amino acids’ (tyrosine, phenylalanine, leucine, isoleucine and valine). The release of insulin in response to raised levels of blood glucose facilitates the uptake of most amino acids, but not tryptophan, into peripheral tissues such as muscle. In contrast tryptophan is bound to blood albumin and insulin increases the affinity of albumin for tryptophan. The result is that the ratio of tryptophan to the other amino-acids in the blood increases.
Tryptophan and the other large neutral amino acids compete with each other for a transporter molecule that allows entry into the brain. Thus, when a high carbohydrate meal increases the ratio of tryptophan to other large amino acids, relatively more tryptophan is transported into the brain. Tryptophan is the precursor of the neurotransmitter serotonin into which it is transformed by the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase. Normally tryptophan hydroxylase is not fully saturated and any increased transportation of tryptophan into the brain results in an increase in serotonin synthesis and serotinergic neurotransmission.
 
As there is relatively little tryptophan in protein, compared to other amino acids, the consumption of a meal high in protein will result in a low ratio of tryptophan to other amino acids. It therefore follows that the rate at which tryptophan enters the brain will be lower8. The behavioural consequences of increased serotinergic activity include changes in aggressiveness, mood and pain sensitivity.
A test of the hypothesis that meals differing in protein and carbohydrate content will have different physiological consequences is offered by the measurement of the ratio of tryptophan to long chain neutral amino acids in plasma. A series of studies have found, as predicted, differences in this ratio after high carbohydrate as opposed to high protein meals9–11. Similar effects were observed in the obese12 and those suffering with Seasonal Affective Disorder2 . Although superficially supportive of the Wurtman theory, the practical significance of these findings is unclear.
Table 1 summarizes the results of 30 human studies that have looked at the influence of meals that differed in the percentage of calories that came from protein rather than carbohydrate. There is clear support for the theory of Wurtman that the ratio of carbohydrate to protein in a meal influences the ratio between trypto- phan and long chain neutral amino acids. However, these data do not give support for anything other than the first step of the theory. Clearly when protein offers less than 2% of the calories then the ratio of amino acids in plasma markedly favours tryptophan. However, as little as 5% of the calories in the form of protein is enough to ensure that this does not happen. It is easier to decrease the availability of tryptophan to the blood- brain transport molecule, by consuming a large amount of protein, than it is to increase it by consuming a large amount of carbohydrate. No normal meal will contain so little protein that the uptake of tryptophan will be increased. Even foods that are said to be high in carbohydrate contain relatively high levels of protein. In potatoes 10% of the calories come in the form of protein and in bread 15%. If anything these food items,

Table 1 The influence of protein in a meal on the ratio of tryptophan to long-chain neutral amino acids. Data from thirty studies are summarized. Meals are classified in the first column in terms of the percentage calories that were in the form of protein. The ratio of the tryptophan (T) to long-chain neutral amino acids (LNAA) in the plasma is expressed as a percentage of baseline values

% Calories as protein	Number of subjects	T/LNAA
as % baseline	Significant studies
< 2%	140	123%	10/14
4%	10	109%	0/1
5–10%	34	101%	0/4
12–19%	18	94%	0/2
20–49%	24	75%	2/3
> 50%	67	67%	4/6
 

 
traditionally described as ‘high carbohydrate’, will decrease the availability of tryptophan for transport into the brain.
There is little support for the suggestion that carbohydrate selectively benefits the depressed, rather it appears to have a general beneficial effect3. The mechanism by which an increased carbohydrate intake improves mood remains obscure.

Chocolate and emotional comfort

When attitudes to chocolate were explored, using factor analysis, two major factors resulted13. The first factor was labelled craving and was associated with a considerable preoccupation with chocolate and eating it compulsively. The questions fell into two groups. Chocolate was ‘‘overpowering,’’ ‘‘preys on my mind,’’ you cannot ‘‘take it or leave it’’ and ‘‘can’t get it out of my head.’’ The weakness for chocolate occurred when under emotional stress; ‘‘when I am bored’’, ‘‘to cheer me up’’, ‘‘when I am upset’’ and ‘‘when I am down.’’ The coupling of these two groups of questions suggested a link between negative mood and an intense desire to consume chocolate.
The second factor also included two types of question. Firstly there are comments associating chocolate with negative experiences: I feel ‘‘unattrac- tive,’’ ‘‘sick,’’ ‘‘guilty,’’ ‘‘depressed,’’ ‘‘unhealthy’’ after eating chocolate. It is not surprising that after eating chocolate ‘‘I often wish I hadn’t.’’ Associated with this guilt are comments related to weight and body shape: ‘‘I often diet,’’ ‘‘I look at the calorific value of a chocolate snack,’’ ‘‘If I ate less chocolate I think I would have a better figure.’’ The second factor was labelled ‘‘guilt.’’ Hetherington and MacDiarmid14 commented that self-reported ‘chocolate addicts’ do not represent an homogeneous group. It may well be that some self- reported ‘chocolate addicts’ feel guilt whilst others do not.
The factor analytical approach confirmed13, in a normal population, the impression created previously when those with psychological problems have been considered. Chocolate is consumed in moments of emotional distress, it is consumed for its comforting properties. A group who reported ‘‘self-medicating’’ with chocolate were more likely to have personality traits associated with hysteroid dysphoria, a syndrome characterized by episodes of depression in response to feeling rejected15. The experience of strong food cravings was associated with being more bored, anxious and having a dysphoric mood16. Although a desire for chocolate was associated with depression it was not found to be related to suicidal thoughts17.
A recent study is the only one to systematically vary mood and look at chocolate intake18. Music was used to induce either a happy or sad mood. Chocolate intake,
 
but not intake of the chocolate substitute carob, increased in those who heard the sad music.
Benton19 discussed the mechanisms that are associ- ated with the ability of chocolate to improve mood. Some have suggested that the mechanism suggested by Wurtman (see above) accounts for chocolates mood elevating properties. In this context chocolate is described as a high carbohydrate containing food with the implication that the passage of tryptophan into the brain is stimulated. However, as chocolate contains 13% protein it would decrease rather than increase the uptake of tryptophan (Table 1). A variety of ‘drug-like’ mechanisms were proposed. Chocolate contains anandamides that act at the same site in the brain as cannabis20. Phenylethylamine, acts in a similar manner to amphetamine and is also found in chocolate. A 50 g bar of chocolate will provide in the range of 10 to 30 mg of caffeine, a dose that compares with the 85 mg
/150 ml found in coffee. A bar of chocolate will provide from 25 to 50 mg of magnesium and the increased chocolate craving in the pre-menstrual stage has been proposed to be an attempt to increase the intake of this mineral. Benton19 considered these suggestions and concluded that the levels of these ‘drug-like’ substances provided by a bar of chocolate were several orders of magnitude less than those needed to produce a pharmacological action.
A critical experiment compared the ability of brown chocolate, white chocolate and cocoa powder to satisfy chocolate craving21. When in their everyday life subjects experienced chocolate craving they opened a box and found either white or brown chocolate, or some of their constituents, that they consumed. They recorded the extent to which their chocolate craving was satisfied. As the putative ‘drug-like’ constituents of chocolate are found in cocoa powder, if these drugs are critical to the satisfaction of chocolate craving, chocolate craving should be satisfied by cocoa powder. It was not. The conclusion was that the critical factor that satisfied chocolate craving was the taste and mouth-feel.
Benton19 concluded that the most likely basis of the attraction of chocolate is that it stimulates the release of endorphins. The intake of sweet items and other palatable foods is increased by opiate agonists and decreased by antagonists22,23. There is considerable evidence that in rats endogenous opiates regulate food intake by modulating the extent to which pleasure is induced by palatable foods. In humans opioid antagonists decrease thinking about food24,25 and food intake26,27. It was proposed that with a monotonous diet the endogenous opiate system does not control eating. However, under stress, or when consuming highly palatable foods, it plays a role28.
Thus in both normal subjects, and those chosen because of their psychiatric complaints, there is an
 

 
association between chocolate craving and its con- sumption when emotionally stressed.

Micro-nutrient status and mood

With vitamin deficiency psychological symptoms such as depression, hysteria and hypochondria may appear earlier than the symptoms of an out-right deficiency disease; this was observed when low levels of thiamine29, riboflavin30, vitamin C, but not vitamin A31, have been experimentally induced. Numerous investigators have reported associations between deficiencies of folate or vitamin B12 and psychiatric syndromes including depression and dementia32–38. Some workers have hypothesized that in the elderly cognitive impairment and organic psychosis are often associated with B12 deficiency36 , whereas depression is associated with folate deficiency34,38. However, it should be remem- bered that in a sample of geriatric patients only 3.7% were B12 and 1.3% folate deficient39. Nevertheless, those with below median levels of both vitamins had poorer scores on tests of cognitive functioning. The severity of depression was negatively correlated with folate levels, whereas those with an organic psychosis, and a family history of the disorder, had lower B12 levels. Botez et al.40 selected a group of 49 depressed patients with low folate levels. After seven to eleven months of folate supplementation the patients were less easily fatigued and distracted, and the scores on all the sub-tests of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale increased, particularly those measuring non-verbal rather than verbal skills.
The elderly as a group have a higher risk of micro- nutrient deficiency than young adults41. Goodwin et al.42 correlated biochemical indices of vitamin status and cognitive functioning in the elderly. They reported significant correlations between folate, riboflavin, vitamins C and B12 statuses and memory capacity. The levels of riboflavin and folate were also positively related to the ability to think abstractly. Chome et al.43 followed up these findings and compared elderly who had a deficiency of at least one vitamin, with those who did not. The deficient group produced poorer scores on tests of mood. However, supplementation failed to alter psychological functioning, although the authors suggested that this may have reflected a small sample size.
Perhaps the most systematic data concerning an association between vitamin status and mood relates to thiamine. When Brozek29 supplied a diet, that lacked thiamine, the first signs of deprivation were the devel- opment of anorexia, muscular weakness, increased irritability and depression. Responses to the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory demonstrated a marked deterioration of the psychoneurotic triad of hypochondriasis,  depression  and  hysteria.  When
 
thiamine was again administered personality changed rapidly for the better. Subsequently, the association between thiamine status and mood, in those whose normal diet provides a marginal thiamine intake, has been reported in four double-blind placebo controlled studies.
Benton et al.44 found a correlation between baseline thiamine status and mood in young healthy females. After four months of taking a multi-vitamin supplement that included thiamine, mood improved when thiamine status improved, and mood was poorer when thiamine status declined. A similar relationship was not found with eight other vitamins. The thiamine status of 18% of this sample was marginal (transketolase activation 15– 25%) and 2% were deficient (activation greater than 25%).
Similarly Smidt et al.45 found that the taking of 10 mg of thiamine, for six weeks, was associated with greater feelings of well being, and less fatigue, in a group of elderly Irish females living in the community. The thiamine status in this Irish study was poor; in the case of 48% of the sample it was deficient and with another 17% it was marginal. The poor status reflects, in part, the lack of a policy in Ireland of enriching food with thiamine.
In Germany young adult males were screened and a group with a transketolase activation of over 23% was distinguished who had an adequate level of the other vitamins (5% of the population)46. Poor thiamine status was associated with introversion, inactivity, fatigue, decreased self-confidence and generally poorer mood. Supplementation with thiamine for two months, under a double-blind procedure, resulted in increased socia- bility and sensitivity. In a British study47 120 young adult females took either a placebo or 50 mg of thiamine, each day for two months. An improvement in thiamine status was associated with reports of being more clearheaded, composed and energetic. The taking of thiamine had no influence on memory but reaction times were faster following supplementation. These influences took place in subjects whose thiamine status, according to the traditional criterion, was adequate.
Thus there are four double-blind placebo controlled studies in which thiamine supplementation improved mood in subjects who are not thiamine deficient, as usually defined. The question arises as to whether the response to thiamine was a physiological or pharma- cological reaction. Certainly some studies used doses well in excess of the recommended level. There are several reasons to suggest that the improvement in mood reflected a physiological response. Firstly, the improvement in mood in these studies typically correlated with an improvement in thiamine status, that is it was those with an initially poor thiamine status whose mood improved44,47. There is consistent evidence
 

 
that a significant minority of industrialized populations consume diets that offer marginal amounts of thiamine48. Secondly an improvement in mood has been reported following the taking of a relatively small dose of thiamine (2 mg)46.

Iron status

Iron deficiency is one of the most common nutritional problems in the world, something true in both the developed and developing worlds. In a sample of Spanish women 98.3% had iron intakes below the recommended dietary levels, 3.9% had low levels of both haemoglobin and ferritin (iron storage protein)50. In Denmark 9.7% of women had low ferritin levels and 2.2% iron-deficiency anaemia51. In the United Kingdom 51.6% of females and 11.5% of males had serum ferritin levels below the accepted cutoff of 20 ng/l.52. A low iron status was more common in females, vegetarians and those who were dieting.
The response of many athletes is to take iron supplements, though these should only be consumed when the iron status is low, as excessive supplementa- tion can lead to a low copper and zinc status53. However, there seems to be a consensus that low iron status without anaemia is not associated with poorer performance in athletes53, although iron deficiency anaemia results in a decreased ability to exercise. Iron deficiency anaemia is associated with reports of poor mood, lethargy and problems of sustaining attention. For example an Australian study reported that anaemic women scored more highly on a questionnaire measuring psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety and depression54. A low iron status, without anaemia, has been associated with feelings of depression in those taking the oral contraceptive52,54. The answer to a related question is less certain; does exercise compromise iron status. A recent review did, however, conclude that endurance athletes are at risk of becoming iron deficient55. In endurance events, particularly in females, iron status may be compromised because of gastro- intestinal bleeding, sweating and damage to red blood cells.
Given the frequency with which low iron status occurs in the general population it is an important nutritional factor that may limit the motivation and capacity to exercise. There can be little doubt that in a minority of the population the lack of energy that results from iron deficiency anaemia will be a serious disincentive to exercise53–55.

Discussion

We should expect that what we eat, and the extent to which we exercise, will interact and thus impact on health. However, there has been little attempt to
 
simultaneously consider both factors. It is clear from the example of chocolate13 that palatable food can be a source of comfort when we are under stress or experience a poor mood. As there is widespread evidence that the taking of exercise is associated with better mood56 it could be predicted that exercise would have an impact on the intake of ‘comfort foods’ with consequent implications for the overall diet.
In recommending a healthy diet one factor that should be taken into account is how diet makes us feel. Although what we eat is influenced by many factors we are attracted to items that either taste pleasant or improve our mood. We should not overstate the influence and impact of diet on mood, however, there is growing evidence that what we eat has an influence on how we feel.
The findings that diets containing high levels of carbohydrate were associated with better mood3–5 are welcome given the health recommendations that we should eat more carbohydrate and less fat.
Benton49 marshalled the evidence that very often the first symptoms associated with a sub-clinical intake of a micro-nutrient are usually psychological. There is a series of double-blind placebo controlled studies that report, in at least some of the population, that micro- nutrient supplementation is associated with better mood44–47 but also memory, attention and scores on intelligence tests.
Some nutritionists argue that if the diet contains sufficient calories and protein then it is probable that the intake of micro-nutrients will be adequate, as they come associated with the rest of the diet. In part such a view may reflect the biological methods that have been used to judge vitamin status. Although nutritionists have not traditionally used psychological measures to monitor nutritional status, it may be argued that they are a particularly appropriate way of examining the possibility that a sub-clinical deficiency exists. Mood and cognitive processing reflect the summated activity of billions of neurones and countless biochemical pathways and their associated enzymes. Thus it may be that relatively small dietary deficiencies, that are dismissed as causing only minor changes to the acti- vity of a single enzyme, will along with a large number of similar minor effects, have a measurable and poten- tially important cumulative influence on cerebral func- tioning. It can be argued that if sub-clinical deficiencies exist then psychological functioning, including changes in mood, may be one of the first indications.
There is little evidence that micro-nutrient supple- mentation improves the performance of athletes. This is not surprising as it is to be expected that the increase in calories associated with intense energy expenditure will result in an increased intake of micro-nutrients. Particular problems may, however, exist in those using exercise as a means of controlling body weight while
 

 
dieting. In the case of both thiamine and iron intake the frequency that a marginal intake occurs gives grounds for concern.


